PRAISE FOR THE SETH BOOKS 
"The Seth books present an alternate map of reality with a new diagram of 
the psyche .. . useful to all explorers of consciousness." 
— Deepak Chopra, M.D. 
author of The Seven Spiritual Laws of 
Success and Creating Affluence 
"Seth was one of my first metaphysical teachers. He remains a constant 
source of knowledge and inspiration in my life." 
— Marianne Williamson 
author of A Return to Love 
"I would like to see the Seth books as required reading for anyone on 
their spiritual pathway. The amazing in-depth information in the Seth 
books is as relevant today as it was in the early '70s when Jane Roberts 
first channeled this material." 
— Louise Hay 
author of You Can Heal Your Life 
"As you read Seth's words, you will gain more than just new ideas. Seth's 
energy comes through every page, energy that expands your 
consciousness and changes your thoughts about the nature of reality." 
— Sanaya Roman 
author of Living with foy 
"The Seth books were of great benefit to me on my spiritual journey and 
helped me to see another way of looking at the world." 
— Gerald G. Jampolsky, M.D. 
author of Love is Letting Go of Fear 
"To my great surprise — and slight annoyance — I found that Seth 
eloquently and lucidly articulated a view of reality that I had arrived at 
only after great effort and an extensive study of both paranormal 
phenomena and quantum physics...." 
— Michael Talbot 
author of The Holographic Universe and 
Beyond the Quantum 
B O O K S BY JANE R O B E R T S 
The Rebellers (1963) 
The Coming ofSeth (How to Develop Your ESP Power) (1966) 
TheSeth Material (1970) 
Seth Speaks: The Eternal Validity of the Soul {1912)^ 
The Education of Oversoul Seven (1973)** 
The Nature of Personal Reality. A Seth Book (1974)* 
Adventures in Consciousness (1975) 
Dialogues of The Soul and Mortal Selfin Time (1975) 
Psychic Politics: A n Aspect Psychology Book (1976) 
The World View of Paul Czanne:A Psychic Interpretation (1977) 
The AfterdeathJournal of an American Philosopher: The World View of 
William James (1978) 
The Unknown Reality. A Seth Book Volume 1 (1977)** 
The Unknown Reality. A Seth Book Volume 2 {1979)** 
The Further Education of Oversoul Seven (1979)** 
Emir s Education in the Proper Use of Magical Powers (1979) 
The Nature of the Psyche: Its Human Expression. A Seth Book (1979)** 
The Individual and the Nature of Mass Events. A Seth Book (1981) ** 
The God of Jane: A Psychic Manifesto (1981) 
If We Live Again: Or, Public Magic and Private Love (1982) 
Oversoul Seven and the Museum of Time (1984) 
Dreams, Evolution, & Value Ful llment. A Seth Book Vol. 1 (1986)** 
Dreams, Evolution, & ValueFul llment. A Seth Book Vol.2{ 1986)** 
Seth, Dreams, and Projection of Consciousness (1986) 
The Magical Approach. A Seth Book (1995) 
The Way Toward Health. A Seth Book (1997) 
* New editions co-published by Amber-Allen / New World Library, 1994 and 1995. 
** New editions published by Amber-Allen Publishing, 1995,1996, and 1997. 
A 
ht/l/ 
BOOK 
gti&Way 
TOWARD 
HEALTH 
FOREWORD AND EPILOGUE BY ROBERT F. BUTTS 
AMBER 
A L L E f 
AMBER-ALLEN PUBLISHING 
SAN RAFAEL, CALIFORNIA 
Copyright © 1997 by Robert F. Butts 
Published by Amber-Allen Publishing, Inc. 
P.O. Box 6657 
San Rafael, CA 94903 
Cover Art: Robert F. Butts 
Cover Design: Beth Hansen 
Editorial: Janet Mills 
Typography: Rick Gordon, Emerald Valley Graphics 
All rights reserved. This book may not be reproduced in whole or in part 
without written permission from the publisher, except by a reviewer who 
may quote brief passages in a review; nor may any part of this book be 
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by 
any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or other, 
without written permission from the publisher. 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Seth (Spirit) 
The way toward health / [channeled by] Jane Roberts; 
foreword and notes by Robert F. Butts, 
p. cm. — (A Seth book) 
Includes index. 
I. Health. 2. Spirit writings. I. Roberts, Jane, 1929-1984. 
II. Title. III. Series: Seth (Spirit). Seth book. 
613 —DC21 
97-18255 
CIP 
ISBN 978-1-878424-30-3 
Printed in U.S.A. on acid-free paper 
Distributed by Hay House, Inc. 
17 
16 
15 
14 
13 
12 
11 
10 
9 
8 
7 
CONTENTS 
Foreword by Robert F Butts 
. 
vii 
PART O N E : DILEMMAS 
1 
Chapter 1 
The Purpose of This Book, and Some 
Important Comments About Exuberance 
and Health 
3 
Chapter 2 
Biologically Valid Thoughts, Attitudes, 
and Beliefs 
64 
Chapter 3 
Daredevils, Death-Defiers, and Health 
139 
Chapter 4 
The Broken-Hearted, the Heartless, and 
Medical Technology 
152 
Chapter 5 
Suggestion and Health 
167 
Chapter 6 
"States of Health and Disease" 
186 
Chapter 7 
The State of Childhood in Relationship 
to Health, and Hints for Parents 
213 
Chapter 8 
Childrens' Play, Reincarnation, and Health . . . . 226 
Chapter 9 
You, You, You, and You. Living at 
Cross Purposes 
235 
• v • 
. V1 . 
CONTENTS 
PART T W O : STARTING OVER 
2 4 5 
Chapter 10 
A New Beginning. Instructions, Suggestions, and 
Resolutions — and When to Ignore These 
247 
Chapter 11 
Starting Over From the Bottom Upward. 
The Will to Live 
261 
Chapter 12 
Early Instances of Death or Disease 
in Relationship to Further 
Reincarnational Influences 
283 
Chapter 13 
"Messages" from Gods, Demons, Heroes, 
and Other Prominent Persons — or, 
More Conflicting Beliefs 
299 
Chapter 14 
Nirvana, Right is Might, Onward Christian 
Soldiers, and the Human Body as a Planet 
Worth Saving 
309 
Epilogue by Robert E Butts 
362 
Index 
365 
FOREWORD 
T
he Way Toward Health is more than an account of the stay — and 
death —> of my wife, Jane Roberts, in a hospital in Elmira, New 
York, just 13 years ago. I've long wanted to see it published while feeling, knowing, that it has much else to offer, too. Not only about Jane's 
fine ability to speak in a trance or dissociated state for Seth, that 
"energy personality essence," as he calls himself, but about all of the 
vastly complicated challenges that can, and do, arise in the course of 
a human life. 
Our lives, I've learned, don't simply proceed nicely and directly 
from "birth" to "death." Instead, I see each one of us as traveling a 
most curious and branching-out or circuitous route, one that is creative in ways that are both known and, I'm sure now, unknown. 
Ah, there's the challenge, then — to understand our inherent 
creativity. We can try to mold it, to make it conform or behave, but 
each life has a life of its own. How fortunate! My wife's life and work 
show that we can even create challenges and goals before birth, then 
in physical life plunge into fulfilling those qualities as we don flesh 
and clothing and beliefs. Yet what great, unexpected convolutions 
we can encounter in those challenges we've created! Even so, I 
think, ultimately we come to understand, whether on conscious or 
• vii • 
• viii • 
FOREWORD 
unconscious levels — or both — that we were utterly ourselves while 
learning along the way. 
Jane died in the hospital at 2:08 A.M. on Wednesday, September 5, 
1984, after being there, quite helpless in certain ways, for a year and 
nine months. It was the third time she'd been hospitalized since 
February 1982. Since her death many have written to both sympathize 
and to ask "Why?" She had Seth, didn't she — for whom she spoke 
for some 21 years; she also produced six books with him along the 
way (plus a number of books on her "own"). Why hadn't Seth gotten 
her out of her dilemma, turned the magic key in the proper psychic 
lock? She was only 55 years old when she died. She could have lived 
for another 20 years, say, and contributed even more to our knowledge, 
both with Seth and by herself. She could have become world famous 
had she chosen to go that route. 
The answers to such questions that Jane, Seth, and I arrived at are 
in this book. Jane was a human being first, and a very gifted psychic 
second. Seth did help her, many many times over the years. Beyond 
that, Jane and I learned that there exist great realms of knowledge 
and feeling as yet largely unrevealed. It would have been even finer 
to tap into those wondrous mazes much more, but we did the best we 
could. Seth still helps my wife, I'm sure. They're united now, and in 
larger terms also meeting with many others they know from the 
"past," "present," and "future." Because of certain dreams I believe 
that even portions of my own entity (Seth calls me Joseph) are joining in. Well, why not, since as Seth describes reality, everything exists 
at the same "time?" Tricky concepts and questions to wrestle with, I 
know, and sometimes contradictory. Enough to last for a lifetime in 
just this mundane reality. 
I think this book shows, then, that the ways toward health can 
and do vary tremendously. In some stubborn and psychically 
grounded way we each are going to make our own choices, as human 
beings always have. Surely Jane's life shows this, and in ways that neither of us were even remotely aware of consciously when we married 
42 years ago. 
During those 21 months in the hospital, Jane, Seth, and I said 
much about her physical/psychic condition, and I recorded it all in 
my homemade shorthand as best I could under often very stressful 
conditions. In all that time I missed spending up to six or more 
FOREWORD 
• ix • 
hours a day with my wife only once, because of a heavy snowstorm. 
For weeks after her admittance in April, I didn't know if Jane would 
ever do any "psychic" work again, but three months later she surprised me by beginning a series of dialogues similar to the "worldview" material she'd produced for her books on the psychologist and 
philosopher William James, and the artist Paul Cezanne. Once 
again, she was inspired by my questions on art and related matters. 
"At least I feel I'm doing something I'm made for," she said when 
starting the new project. She concluded it in September 1983, then 
over the next four months delivered a series of 71 mosdy short, 
mostly personal Seth sessions. She finished that series on January 2, 
1984 — and began The Way Toward Health the next day. 
During all of this time, we told no one in the hospital what we were 
specifically doing — staff accepted our conventional explanation that 
we were writers and "just working." It all worked very well, even when 
we were often interrupted, as the sessions show. 
Inevitably, however, much had to be omitted from The Way 
Toward Health as it's presented here — not Seth's material, but from 
Jane's and my work and notes. I owe a great deal to the very considerate help of Janet Mills, the proprietor of Amber-Allen Publishing. 
We saw that if all of the peripheral material for each session was 
included, the book would be very long. (I had a number of personal 
experiences and insights that I thought enhanced concepts of the 
Seth material, for example.) But what to cut, when to stop? This presented a dilemma for me. 
When Jane began delivering the Seth material in 1963,1 became 
very conscious of the record we'd leave, not with Seth but concerning our private lives. The one can't help but add to the other, 
increasing the marvelous complexity of both. Long ago I came to 
believe that nothing exists in isolation; to omit some of the record 
leaves gaps, obviously. Hardly an original idea, yet one that I often 
see ignored in the surface activities of our daily lives. Other facets of 
our physical and nonphysical lives could help us tremendously if 
more conscious attention was given to them, regardless of "when" 
they happened. 
But how can we — how can anyone — bring more of our inherent 
knowledge to consciousness, to use? How can we become more keenly 
aware of the facts and implications of our dreams, for example, and 
FOREWORD 
very great influences they exert in our lives? Often our dreams 
doorways to other realities. Yet I know that we're delving ever 
re deeply into our psyches; Jane's work with Seth, as well as her 
try and other writings, show that. The great gifts of our psyches 
all there, waiting . . . 
Robert F. Butts 
Elmira, New York 
September 1997 
PART ONE 
DILEMMAS 
CHAPTER 1 
THE PURPOSE OF THIS BOOK, AND 
SOME IMPORTANT COMMENTS ABOUT 
EXUBERANCE AND HEALTH 
JANUARY 3,1984 
4:50 P.M. TUESDAY 
/ rT^his 
morning at 10:00, I took a special delivery package from the 
\ 
J. postman — a translation in French of The Individual and the 
Nature of Mass Events. Others of our books are being translated also. 
(I left the house for the post office and to take Jane's typewriter in for 
cleaning. So I was twenty minutes late getting to Jane's hospital room 330 
this afternoon. The day was warmer — 32 degrees. 
(My wife was late getting back from hydro* — the staff was very busy. 
The tray was late also, but Jane ate a good lunch. 
(3:15. Jane began readingyesterday's session — and she did very well, even 
better than yesterday. She finished at 3:35. "Ifyour eyes keep improving, "I said, 
"maybe eventually you 11 end up with weaker glasses." She was obviously surprised at the thought, but then, why not? Mine had improved a few years ago. 
(3:40.1 cut Jane's fingernails and toenails. The job went easier than it 
used to — and indeed, the doubled-up fingers on her right hand loosened 
up considerably as I worked on them. Another improvement, I told her. 
*Hydro, as staff members call it, is short for the hospital's hydrotherapy department. Each morning, Jane is placed upon a litter that is lowered into a large tub of 
gently-swirling warm water that massages her whole body. The treatment is very 
relaxing, very beneficial, especially for bedsores. 
• 3 • D<± • THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
(4:01. A new nurse named Betty took all of fane's vitals. I worked on 
mail as Jane had a piece of candy and a cigarette. I thought she was going 
to pass up having a session, it was getting so late, but finally she decided to 
have a short one as the time to turn her on her side arrived.) 
Now: I bid you another fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
I will speak briefly. 
I wanted you to know (pause) that new developments concerning 
the [medical] insurance situation are occurring, to your benefit. 
("Oh. Okay.*) 
An added note: When you can, a gentle massaging of the tops of 
Ruburt's* toes, by the nails, and perhaps down a bit toward the first 
joints, will help increase the body's entire circulation. Earlier, he 
would not have been able to respond. This only need take a few 
moments. 
As always, the session format sets up its own accelerated healing 
framework. 
I may or may not return, according to those rhythms of which I 
speak, but know that I am present and approachable. 
("Well, we have time if you want to say something more." 
(Pause.) I will merely make a few comments. As you know, or 
have suspected, I am indeed adding book dictation — at our own 
pace, considering the circumstances. It should be relatively easy to 
identify those portions — 
("Yes.") 
— and Ruburt will be able to do so easily, if ever you have difficulty, knowing when one portion begins and another ends. 
("It's not a problem. Any idea of a title, or do you want to wait on that?") 
I will give you that material later, with other introductory passages. 
("Okay. * 
("Oh, it's me,"Jane said. 
*When he began dictating Seth Speaks way back in January 1970, Seth told us: "I 
write this book through the auspices of a woman of whom I have become quite 
fond. To others it seems strange that I address her as 'Ruburt/ and 'him,' but the 
fact is that I have known her in other times and places, by other names. She has 
been both a man and a woman, and the entire identity who has lived these separate 
lives can be designated by the name of Ruburt." 
THE PURPOSE OF THIS BOOK 
• 11 • 
(4:56 P.M. Jane said that as soon as she gave the last sentence from Seth 
she thought the title of the book would be The Way Toward Health. She 
didn't actually pick that up from Seth, it just came to her,; And I told her 
that her statement reminded me that the same thought had come to me a 
couple of times previously after I'd been pretty sure that Seth was giving 
book work. 
(Upon checking, I verified my original guess, that she'd first done an 
outline for The Way Toward Health in Volume One of The "Unknown" 
Reality. That book was published in 1977. See Appendix 7. 
("That first line of the session is an entertaining one," I said, and read 
her Seth's statement about the insurance matter. I'd been surprised, since I 
hadn't expected him to comment today. 
("The minute before I said I was going to have a session, that idea came 
into my mind, "Jane said. "I knew it was from Seth." She hadn't had time 
to mention it to me before the session began. 
(A note: I'll have the details on lap in my collection of Time magazines — but today there took place' the freeing of the American airman 
through the visit of the Reverend Jesse Jackson to President Assacl of Syria. 
This is a great moral and political accomplishment on Jackson's part, especially after President Reagan hadn't wanted him to go to Syria. 
(Of more importance, it seems on the surface at least, is a reaching-out 
on Assad's part toward a dialogue with the Western world — quite an 
unexpected development, I thought. As I discussed the events of today with 
Jane, and watched them on TV, it came to me that they might signal at least 
a beginning of those very beneficial world events Seth had referred to for the 
coming year in the session for December 28, 1983. Jane didn't know, and 
I'm not leaping to any conclusions. Seth had referred to "many countries 
changing their alliances," however. Syria is now allied with Russia. Fascinating to follow, I told Jane.) 
JANUARY 4 , 1 9 8 4 
3:54 P.M. WEDNESDAY 
(In yesterday's session, Seth said that "new developments concerning 
the insurance situation are occurring, to your benefit." It appears that he's 
right so far, considering what our lawyer told me this morning about talking with the hospital, doctors, and Blue Cross. 
• D<± • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
(Jane ate a good lunch as we talked. While I answered mail she began 
reading yesterday's session, and once again did very well, holding the pages 
in her left hand as usual She said that last night she'd had a brief blue 
period, in which she'd wondered if she'd ever walk out on the street again, 
but got herself out of it by saying "cancel" to herself and remembering Seth }s 
material 
(She also thought of a chapter in Seth's new book, one that was titled 
"Food and You"— then found herself stewing about saying something 
wrong in the book and leading people astray — more signs of old habits. 
"But then," she said, "I told myself to trust myself and Seth, and I said to 
hell with it" 
("You've got to," 1 said. "We can't afford to do anything else anymore. 
Keep that word 'trust' in mind." 
(When the nurse took Jane's temperature it was 98.8. "My God," I 
joked, "that's almost perfect." 
(Jane got tired waiting for people to take all of her vital signs, like blood 
pressure and temperature, so she launched into the session.) 
Now: I bid you another fond good afternoon. 
("The same to you, Seth.") 
The will to live can be compromised by doubts, fears, and rationalizations. 
Some people, for example, definitely want to live, while they try 
to hide from life at the same time. Obviously, this leads them into conflicts. Such people will impede their own motions and progress. They 
become overly concerned about their own safety. If any of my readers feel this way, they may even hide these feelings from themselves. 
They will concentrate upon all of the dangers present in society in 
their own country, or in other portions of the world, until their own 
frightened overall concern for safety seems to be a quite natural, 
rational response to conditions over which they have no control. 
(Pause.) What is actually involved is a kind of paranoia, which can 
become such a powerful response that it can take over a person's life, 
and color all projects. If this has happened to any of my readers, you 
might recognize yourself in any number of different scenarios. You 
might be a "survivalist," setting up stores and provisions to be used in 
case of a nuclear disaster. It may seem to you that you are quite jiistified in protecting yourself and your family from disaster. In many 
THE PURPOSE OF THIS BOOK 
• 11 • 
such cases, however, the people so worried about the occurrence of 
danger from the outside world are instead concerned about the 
nature of their own energy, and afraid that it might destroy them. 
(4:03.) In other words, they do not trust the energy of their own 
lives. They do not trust the natural functioning of their bodies, or 
accept this functioning as a gift of life. Instead they question it at 
every point — even holding their breath at times, waiting for something to go wrong. 
Other people may actually impede those portions of the body 
given to mobility, so that they limp, or tighten their muscles, or otherwise tamper with their bodies so that the end result is one that 
requires a cautious, hesitating approach to motion. Some may even 
cause themselves to have severe accidents, in which they sacrifice 
portions of their bodies to retain a sense of — 
(4:07. The nurse came in to take Jane's blood pressure. Jane asked for 
some iced ginger ale. She said that she was doing well — obviously — then 
added that when she spoke a sentence for Seth she also sensed the other sentences to come, or those around the spoken one. "Like even if I give one that's 
at the bottom, like a brick at the bottom of a building, I know the ones up at 
the top of the building." 
(I read this note to her and she agreed that it was an accurate version 
of what she'd just said. "It's almost like instantly sensing a new tall structure, only it's made of words." 
(After getting the ginger ale, I read the session to her that she'd given so 
far, then made sure the door to 330 was closed as much as possible. Resume 
at 4:17.) 
— false safety. 
These rather self-deceptive feelings are not hidden deeply in the 
subconscious mind, as you might suppose. Instead, in the majority of 
cases they consist of quite conscious decisions, made at one time or 
another on quite surface levels. 
(Longpause at 4:19.) 
They are not forgotten, but the people involved simply close 
their own eyes, so to speak, to those decisions, and pretend (underlined) that they do not exist, simply to make their lives appear 
smooth and to save face with themselves, when they know very well 
that the decisions really rest on very shaky ground indeed. 
• D<± • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
I do not wish to simplify matters, but such decisions can be 
uncovered very easily in children, A child might fall and badly scrape 
a knee — so badly that limping is the result, at least temporarily. 
Such a child will often be quite conscious of the reason for the affair: 
he or she may openly admit the fact that the injured part was purposefully chosen so that a dreaded test at school could be missed, 
and the child might well think that the injury was litde enough to pay 
for the desired effect that it produced. 
An adult under the same circumstances might become injured to 
avoid a dreaded event at the office — but the adult may well feel 
ashamed of such a reaction, and so hide it from himself or herself in 
order to save feelings of self-esteem. In such cases, however, the adults 
will feel that they are victims of events over which they have little or 
no control. 
(4:27.) If the same kind of event occurs with any frequency, their 
fear of the world and of daily events may grow until it becomes quite 
unreasonable. Still, in most such instances those inner decisions can 
be easily reached — but while people are determined to "save face," 
they will simply refuse to accept those decisions as their own. People 
will (underlined) to live, to act or not to act. To a large extent they 
will (underlined) the events of their lives — whether or not they are 
willing to admit this to themselves, and they will (underlined) to die. 
(4:32.) Comments. 
All of this, of course, applies to Ruburt's situation — for once, 
indeed, he willed himself into immobility, willing to sacrifice certain 
kinds of motion in order to safely use other kinds of psychological 
motion, because he was afraid of his spontaneous nature, or his spontaneous self. 
He was afraid that it acted according to its own reasons which 
might not be his own — or so he thought. Now he is beginning to 
understand that his energy is the gift of his life — to be expressed, 
not repressed — and to understand, again, that spontaneity knows 
its own order. 
He just told you that when he begins to speak for me he senses an 
entire tall structure of words, and unhesitatingly he lets that structure 
form (intently). The same is true with his ability to move and walk; the 
more he trusts his energy, the more his spontaneity forms its own 
THE PURPOSE OF THIS BOOK 
• 11 • 
beautiful order that results in the spontaneous physical ait of walking — and he is indeed well along the way. The changes have already 
begun in his mind, and they will (underlined) be physically expressed. 
It is no coincidence, in your language, that the word "will" refers 
to the future, as in a line like "it will happen," and also refers to the 
decision-making quality of the mind. 
I may or may not return, again according to those rhythms of 
which I speak — but I am present and approachable. 
("Thank you, Seth." 
(4:39 P.M. "Well, that's your longest session yet," I said. Jane agreed. 
She sipped ginger ale and had a smoke while I read her the rest of the session. It's very good. 
("I didn't want to interrupt while you were reading, "Jane said, "but I 
began to get what he's going to say about a whole lot of things . . . He's 
going to get into epilepsy, and say that it's a result of your fear of your own 
power, and short-circuits it. The same thing with secondary personalities, so 
you can blame your actions on something else." 
("I also got that he's going to say that in ordinary terms we don't have 
access to all the information we've got at one time because consciously it 
would be so hard to sort through it — but that we really are conscious of it, 
and for working purposes we just pretend that we aren't. He's said that 
before — that the so-called unconscious portions of ourselves are in themselves quite conscious." 
(7:10. I left Jane after saying the prayer we always use loith her, and 
went shopping at ACME supermarket on Elmira's south side. Finished 
eating supper at 9:45 P.M. 
(I meant to note: Some of today's Seth material reminds me ofJane's 
"sinful-self' material. Probably inevitable in this book, at least at times . . .) 
JANUARY 5,1984 
4:25 RM. THURSDAY 
(I typed yesterday's session this morning, and didn 'I get to tvork on 
Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment until after 10:30. I also 
made arrangemen ts to get our taxes for 1983 done. It worked out well, but 
I lost time — and when I got to Room 330 this afternoon, my legs were itching again. I told Jane. 
• D<± • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
(The day was warm — over 36 degrees. The ice in the driveway is melting. I'd put rock salt on it last night and this morning. 
(Jane saicl she had a long wait for hydro this morning. She's been 
having a lot of spasms, and fears the catheter was loosened enough 
yesterday that she'll have to have it changed tonight. She saw her doctor 
briefly in hydro. 
(One of the nurse's aides stopped by for a visit. She had been injured 
and suffered a relapse when she fell and twisted or pulled on some of the staples in her leg. Now a prolonged recovery period is predicted. Jane and I 
soon noticed the negative suggestions her doctor had given her, as she talked 
with us. She also told us that another nurse will be out for at least a week 
with a strained back, which she evidently got from trying to lift a patient. It 
made us wonder about working in hospitals — it seemed everyone was sick 
at one time or another. 
(Jane ate a good lunch, then at 3:05 began reading the session from yesterday. She did fairly well, though not as good as yesterday, and finally got 
through the six pages at 3:34. She held the pages okay in her left hand, though. 
She said her ability to perceive had varied considerably, and that she'd had 
to strain to read. I'd seen that her eyes were very red when I gave her drops. 
(3:45.1 read a batch of recent sessions to Jane. She told me of a dream 
she'd had last night, vivid, involving her walking, putting on new clothes 
while in the middle of a street, of leaving the hospital and going across a 
street into a Five and Ten, of putting pretty decorations in her hair. I said 
the dream was a very good one, and once more set the stage for the act of 
walking. She agreed. I worked on some mail. 
(4:00-4:11. A nurse took Jane's vitals — temperature, 98.5. When all 
was clear and quiet — except for the patient, Karina, hollering next 
door — Jane said she'd like to have a short session.) 
Now: I bid you another fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
People who have epilepsy are also afraid of their own energy. 
They do not trust it, nor do they trust the spontaneous portions 
of the self. They are afraid that left alone their energy might strike 
out against others, and so they short-circuit its use, having attacks 
that momentarily render themselves helpless. 
People with so-called secondary personalities also fear their own 
energy. They divide it up so that it seems to belong (long pause) to 
THE PURPOSE OF THIS BOOK 
• 11 • 
different personalities, and is therefore effectively divided. In basic 
terms, true amnesia does not exist in such cases, though it appears 
to. The people involved are quite aware of their activity at all times, 
but they behave in a fashion that is not continual — that is, the main 
personality does not seem to behave in a continual manner, but is 
broken up, or again, seemingly divided. This psychological ploy 
neariy prevents the so-called main personality from using all of its 
energy at any one time. 
(Longpause.) The individuals concerned pretend to themselves 
that they have no memory of the other personalities' existences or 
activities. These personalities, however, store up their energy so that 
one personality often exhibits explosive behavior, or makes certain 
decisions that seem (underlined) to go against the wishes of the 
main entity. In this way (pause), different kinds of behavior may be 
exhibited, and while it would seem that many decisions are made by 
one portion of the self, without another portion of the self knowing 
anything about it, such usually is not the case. In fact, the main personality is able to express many different kinds of probable action, 
but the entire personality is prevented from acting with its full 
energy or power. Instead the energy is diverted into other channels. 
All portions of the self are indeed conscious, and they are also 
basically conscious of each other, though for working purposes they 
may seem to be separate or isolated. 
(Pause at 4:37.) Comments. 
For a few days — at least when possible — read Ruburt those 
portions of yesterday's session that were devoted to his condition. 
I may or may not return, again according to those rhythms of 
which I speak, but know that I am present and approachable. 
("Okay. Thank you." 
(4:40 P.M. I told Jane that Fd thought she would speak longer, but she 
said she often feels that if she did Fd never get the sessions typed. "I notice 
that around 7:00 o'clock you start getting nervous," she said. It's true that 
by then I'm restless and getting tired, but I can always make exceptions. 
"You wouldn't get anything done on Dreams if you had to type longer sessions, " she added. Probably true. 
(I've also thought of re-reading yesterday's excellent session to her often, 
as a sort of reminder.) 
• D<± • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
JANUARY 6 , 1 9 8 4 
4:22 P.M. FRIDAY 
(The day was again warm — about 38 degrees when I leftfor Room 330. 
(Jane was okay, although she said she'd had another long wait before 
and after hydro. Things aren 't too well organized, or are too busy. Jane got 
blue over the hydro situation, the waiting, new people lifting her and not 
knowing how, etc. I met a couple of new nurses or aides myself One looked 
in for a moment after her own therapy — didn't look good, Jane said. My 
own theory is that the people who work there get sick of it after a while, and 
then get sick in order to get a rest or a vacation with pay. 
(Jane ate a good lunch, though, in spite of having some spasms. I told her 
my scratching had subsided considerably since yesterday. "There's only one 
answer," I said in answer to her news about the hospital. "I know," she said, 
"and that's what I'm trying to do." Truly, I added, it was the only way to get 
rid of all the basic negativity in the place. I sometimes wondered why Jane's 
body didn 'I recognize that to an even more profound degree, and see to it that 
her physical body healed itself even more rapidly so that we could get out. 
(3:16. Jane began reading yesterday's session, and did quite well — 
better than yesterday. She was done at 3:25, while I worked on mail. At 
3:36 a new nurse came in to take her temperature — 98.2. At 3:50 another 
nurse took her blood pressure. 
(After holding a session on November 10, 1982, Jane went eleven 
months before her next one on October 9, 1983. In the meantime, she'd gone 
into the hospital on April 20, 1983. Now, starting at 4:00,1 read her portions of some of the sessions she'd held since resuming them in October. 
There are many good points therein, and I don't want to lose track of them. 
Jane did say that she wanted to have a session. We'd wondered about her 
lack of physical motion to any great degree recently.) 
Now: I bid you another fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
The idea of the sinful self will not be predominant in our own 
book, but we certainly will delve into the many unfavorable concepts 
that are held by the various religions — concepts that certainly make 
many people feel that the self is indeed sinful rather than blessed. 
The self is indeed blessed, and just the reminder of that fact can 
often short-circuit negative beliefs, particularly if they are not too 
deep-seated. 
THE PURPOSE OF THIS BOOK 
• 11 • 
As far as Ruburt's motions are concerned, the body is following 
its own rhythms, which will sometimes involve overt, noticeable exercise and activity on the one hand, while on the other it exercises 
internally, so to speak, making all preparations for the other later 
exercises and motion. It seemed, for example, sudden when Ruburt 
fed himself, even if briefly, but that exterior improvement followed 
many inner manipulations, which until then had not connected in 
that particular manner. 
(Pause at 4:27.) Reading some of the earlier sessions of this 
sequence also serves to remind you both of the progress that has 
taken place since those sessions began (on October 9, 1983), and 
therefore invite even newer improvements. 
I may or may not return, again according to those rhythms, but 
know that I am indeed, once more, present and approachable. 
("Okay." 
(4:29 P.M. I read the session to Jane. We thought his comment about the 
sinful self might have come about through my reading to her earlier today 
my question to him of last October about what part the sinful self might be 
playing in her challenges. 
(4:45. I wanted to exercise Jane's right leg while she was still on her 
back, as Seth suggested I do each day, but she decided to wait until I'd 
turned her. I also massaged with Oil of Olay the toes of her feet, as Seth had 
mentioned doing. The right leg moved well. Jane saicl the toe touching sent 
sensations up her legs — as Seth had said it would. 
(As I drifted off into my nap at 5:15, after finishing my dehypnotizing 
massage of Jane, I remembered the dream I'd had last night. After the nap I 
described it to her, and said I'd wanted to do so earlier, so Seth could comment if he wanted to. I'd dreamed, in color, that Jane rebroke her right leg 
several times in the same place. Insurance hassles were involved also. I woke 
up slewing, and finally had to get up from my chair to lake some baking 
soda to relieve my stomach. I slept well after that. 
(After a few minutes, Jane said the dream could have been related to the 
injuries the nurse's aide had suffered to her own impaired leg— the one 
that had been stapled inside that I described in a recent session. The doctor's 
negative suggestions to her could have been involved. 
(Then Jane told me that she, too, had had a negative dream last night. 
A woman she met had cancer of the face, and was taking the drug interferon 
• D<± • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
as treatment. The woman told Jane that Jane had the same kind offacial 
skin that she had — with all of its negative suggestions. 
(It sounds almost as though Jane and I had our worrisome dreams in 
tandem. We agreed that they represented fears on our parts — that they 
weren't literal orprecognitive in any sense.) 
JANUARY 7,1984 
4:11 P.M. SATURDAY 
(The day was colder — 28 degrees — when I left for 330. I'd worked 
on taxes for an hour this morning, and Dreams. No calls from anybody. 
I'd envisioned Jane getting back to her room around 11:00, after hydro, but 
when I got there she said she didn't get back until almost noon. She'd just 
had her fresh bandages put on and been turned, before I arrived. She ate a 
good lunch, though, and seemedio be doing okay. 
(2:45.1 began working with mail, and Jane started reading yesterday's 
session. She zipped right through it — doing the best she has in some little 
while — and finished at 2:55. Very good indeed. 
(3:00. Dana came in to empty Jane's catheter bag, or Foley, as everyone 
calls it. Shawn took her temperature at 3:20 — 98.5; and at 3:45 Lynn 
gave Jane eyedrops. 
(In betiveen all of this activity, ivhen we were alone for quiet moments, 
I mentioned a question to Jane that I'd thought of last night; I hoped Seth 
might go into it, I said. The question had been triggered by a sentence of 
mine in the notes for yesterday's session, to the effect that I sometimes wondered why Jane's body, particularly her body consciousness, didn't simply 
take over to "even a more profound degree, and see to it that her physical 
body healed itself even more rapidly so that we could get out" of the hospital. 
Jane had had an emotional reaction, I'd noticed, when she read that line 
aloud yesterday, and it set me thinking. 
(The question contains many implications. uMaybe such a thing even 
happens at places like this," I said. "If it never happened, it would mean 
the body consciousness was always subservient to other more dominant 
portions of the personality, and I don't think that's true either. After all, 
if that was the case and things went wrong, the body consciousness could 
see its own death approaching, even, and not be able to do anything 
about it. . . " 
THE PURPOSE OF THIS BOOK 
• 11 • 
(I also reminded Jane that we'd like a word from Seth on our negativetype dreams of the night before last, and which I'd described in yesterday's 
session.) 
Now: I bid you another most fond good afternoon. 
("Same to you, Seth.") 
The body consciousness, on its own, is filled with exuberance, 
vitality, and creativity. 
Each most microscopic portion of the body is conscious, strives 
toward its own goals of development, and is in communication with 
all other parts of the body. 
The body consciousness is indeed independent. To a large degree 
its own defense mechanisms protect it from the mind's negative 
beliefs — at least to a large extent. As I have mentioned before, 
almost all persons pass from a so-called disease state back into healthy 
states without ever being aware of the alterations. In those cases the 
body consciousness operates unimpeded by negative expectations or 
concepts. 
When those negative considerations are multiplied, however, 
when they harden, so to speak, then they do indeed begin to diminish the body's own natural capacity to heal itself, and to maintain 
that overall, priceless organization that should maintain it in a condition of excellent strength and vitality. 
There are also occasions when the body consciousness itself rises 
up in spite of a person's fears and doubts, and throws aside a condition of illness in a kind of sudden victory. Even then, however, the 
person involved has already begun to question such negative beliefs. 
The individual may not know how to cast them off, even though he 
or she desires to do so. It is in those instances that the body consciousness arises and throws off its shackles. 
With free will, however, it is not possible for the body consciousness to be given full and clear dominion, for that would deny large 
areas of choices, and cut off facets of learning. The main direction 
and portent, however, of the body consciousness on its own is always 
toward health, expression, and fulfillment. 
The molecules, and even the smaller aspects of the body act and 
react, communicate, cooperate with each other, and share each 
other's knowledge, so that one particle of the body knows what is 
• D<± • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
happening in all other parts. Thus, the amazing organization usually 
works in a smooth, natural fashion. Many body events that you think 
of in your society as negative — certain viruses, for example — are 
instead meant as self-corrective devices, even as fever actually promotes health rather than impedes it. 
(4:26.) The main characteristic of bodily consciousness is its 
spontaneity. (Longpause.) This allows it to work at an incredibly swift 
rate that could not be handled by the topmost conscious portions of 
the mind. Its operation is due to an almost instantaneous kind of 
consciousness, in which what is known is known, with no distance 
between, say, the knower and the known. 
The act of seeing, and all of the body's senses, are dependent 
upon this inner spontaneity. 
(4:29.) Comments. 
Both of your "negative" dreams express left-over doubts and 
fears, and the old concept that the poorest rather than the best outcome of any event will happen. The working of Rxiburt's eyes, and 
the continuous changes in his vision, give indications of the other 
kind of improvements, happening in the circulatory systems and 
other portions of the body. The eyes, knowing his intent now to read, 
read. Reason does not have to tell him how to do this. 
In the same way, simply and gently, let him address his legs, 
telling them his intent to walk again. The actions involved in normal 
walking will begin to return. They are, now, beginning to return (as 
I was just going to ask Seth). On some days his eyes do not read as 
easily as on others, and on those days they simply reflect an unevenness as they prepare themselves for still other improvements. The 
same occurs in other portions of the body. 
(Pause at 4:35.) At this particular time, it is indeed a good idea 
for him to imagine himself walking, almost in a detached manner. 
Certainly without too much seriousness — but lightly. 
Now I may or may not return, again according to those rhythms 
of which I speak — but I am present and approachable. 
("Yes. Okay." 
(4:36 P.M. "It's me, "Jane said. She had a cigarette before I turned her 
on her side. I massaged her toes as Seth had recently suggested, which got 
good results, then after I'd turned her, I gently tuorked her right leg back and 
forth as Seth had suggested. The knee of the broken leg actually works quite 
THE PURPOSE OF THIS BOOK 
• 11 • 
freely, I remarked — much more so than the left knee. Jane agreed. In fact, 
when she's lying down, her left foot impedes the motion of her right foot and 
leg. But this will pass. 
(fane ate a good supper, and I left at 7:10 after reading the prayer with 
her. Sleep well, sweetheart.) 
JANUARY 9,1984 
4:17 P.M. MONDAY 
(No session was held yesterday, Sunday, January 8. However, there are 
several even ts from yesterday that I wan t to summarize here. 
(First is my dream of the night before, which I described to Jane in case 
she had a session and Seth wanted to comment. I dreamed in color that Jane 
and I had moved back to Sayre, Pennsylvania — my home town — to Mrs. 
Potter's old apartment at 317 S. Elmer Avenue. However, the place was 
more spacious, and bore elements of 458 W. Water Street, in Elmira, New 
York, also. I walked around the large rooms, saying to Jane, "See, this place 
isn't bad at all. It's a nice setting, we can make ago of it here." We were in 
town, protected, and looking out the windows I saw more spacious yards 
than actually exist there. I liked the near-downtown setting, and so dicl 
Jane. Elmira is only 18 miles from Sayre. 
(Second: A t 5:301 loent to the restroom off Room 330. While in there, 
the sum of $20,000popped into my head as I idly thought very briefly about 
our friend, Maude Cardwell. In fact, I'd almost forgotten I'd written a 
letter to her last week. I didn't try to pick up anything more. "I don't know 
whether the $20,000 represents all we'll get from donations — the fund — 
whether it's from one person, is a start of something larger, or what," I told 
Jane. But I wanted her to know my impression just in case. * She was about 
to have supper. 
(Third: A t 6:10, as I began feeding Jane, the thought of Steve and 
Tracy Blumenthal crossed my mind quite definitely, without being terribly 
intrusive. Here too, I hadn't been thinking of them — had forgotten, in 
fact, that the day was Sunday, ivhen they usually visit. I suddenly knew 
*Maude Cardwell publishes a Seth-oriented newsletter, Reality Change, from 
her home in Austin, Texas. We've met only by telephone. Maude wants to ask the 
readers of RC to help Jane and me pay for certain very large medical bills not covered by insurance. A most humbling suggestion for my wife and me — we've always 
prided ourselves on making our own way. 
• D<± • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
they were going to call the hospital A few seconds later I heard high-heeled 
footsteps in the hall, coming around the corner, approaching 330. A 
woman we didn 't know knocked, then came in to tell us that Steve was on 
the line, and wanted to visit Jane this evening. Jane said okay — after 
8:00 P.M. I told Jane I hadn't even had time to tell her of my impression 
before the woman — who perhaps was a volunteer answering the phone — 
came to us. In other words, I'd picked up the fact of the call while the 
woman ivalked toward us and I heard her. It's possible, I speculated, that 
the very sound and rhythm of her footsteps helped trigger my conscious realization of the call from Steve. 
(I asked Jane if the Cardwell experience could be said to validate the 
Blumenthal affair, or vice versa, and she said yes, since they'd happened so 
close together. Note that the money affair by-passed entirely the question of 
insurance money. I hadn 7 been thinking of the insurance money at all. 
(Jane had a good day, although a bit of a problem trying to read the session from the day before. She also wore a small patch on her left elbow, which 
she'd knocked somehow — perhaps in hydro — so that it was quite sore.) 
u 
(No interruptions this morning, Monday, January 9.1 worked on taxes 
for an hour, Dreams the rest of the time. I took the Christmas bell, made in 
Switzerland and sent to us by a reader in upstate New York, in to 330; 
when wound up it plays Silent Night most evocatively. The woman who 
sent it wanted Jane to write the founder of a Seth group in Syracuse; the 
lady is dying of cancer. I wrote both women last night. 
(Jane ate a good lunch. I tolcl her that I got mad this morning because 
I felt that the Seth material wasn't — and wouldn't — get the hearing it 
deserved in our society. I asked why the material, if it was inherent ivithin 
human beings, was so much ignored. "/ don't mean just lately," I said, 
"but for thousands of years. "Ifelt that mankind seemed to have deliberately 
or perversely chosen to ignore it, for probably innumerable reasons historically. Yet, why not use it, if it could help solve some of our species' great challenges ? Jane didn't show much of a reaction, beyond saying "They 'U use it." 
(If I wasn't at my best today, neither was Jane. She admitted it, that 
she'd been blue. She tried reading previous sessions, and after taking a 
break in-between, did manage to get through them, but it xvasn't easy. As 
usual, though, she finished up better than she'd been when she started. 
THE PURPOSE OF THIS BOOK 
• 11 • 
(4:05. After her vitals had been taken — temperature 97.4 — Jane 
talked about having a session. Robert, the male nurse, had taken her blood 
pressure, and had to stop and readjust her position to a more comfortable 
one before he could proceed. 
(Jane's Seth voice was a bit stronger today.) 
Now: I bid you another fond good — 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
Exuberance (pause) and a sense of vitality are always present to 
some degree or another. 
Some people — 
(4:18. Diana, an RN, came in to see Jane's hair, which she'd thought 
had been cut. Jane had forgotten to tell me, but someone from downstairs 
had wanted to cut Jane's hair this morning, but then couldn't because of a 
clash of schedules with Jane going to hydro. Jane had canceled the deal. I 
read her the material she'd just given.) 
— are always aware of their own joy regardless of circumstances. 
They feel safe and protected even when the events of their lives do 
not seem favorable. Regardless of their own doubts and worries, 
such people feel themselves supported, and feel that in the end 
everything will work to their advantage. Many other people, however, lose this sense of safety — 
(4:24. Penny, an RN whom we like a lot, stopped in to say good-bye for 
the day. aI'm going crazy," she saicl twice, referring to the hectic day she'd 
had on Surgical 3 today. She's a friend of Luke and Lois Hutter, of Sayre, 
whom Jane and I knew many years ago. Through a call Penny had 
arranged, I talked to Luke around the holidays, and Lois subsequently 
wrote us a letter giving us all the latest news about their family, Mrs. Potter, 
etc. I'd idly speculated with Jane about whether the reacquaintance with the 
Potters — Lois is Mrs. Potter's adopted daughter — had any connection 
with my dream about our moving back to the apartment we'd had in the 
Poller house in Sayre.) 
— and abundance, and it may seem as if joy in living was an 
attribute only of the young. 
Exuberance and joy, however, basically have nothing to do with 
time or age. They may be expressed as vividly and beautifully at the 
age of 80 as at the age of 8. For whole segments of the population, 
however, it seems as if joy and health are fleeting attributes expressed 
briefly in childhood, and then lost forever. 
• D<± • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
(There was much noise in the hall Penny had left the door to 330 half 
open.) 
There are innumerable ways of reclaiming joy in living, however, 
and in so doing (long pause) physical health may be reclaimed by 
those who have found it lacking in their experience. 
(Long pause at 4:29.) The quality of life is intensely important, 
and is to a large extent dependent upon a sense of well-being and 
self-confidence. While these attributes are expressed in the body, 
they also exist in the mind, and there are some cumbersome mental 
beliefs that may severely impede mental and physical well-being. 
We will not concentrate upon these, but we will indeed discuss 
them, so that each person can understand the relationship between 
poor beliefs and poor health, for through understanding these connections the individual can re-experience the great mental variety 
that is possible. No individual is helpless, for example, in the face of 
negative beliefs. He or she can learn to make choices once again, 
and thus to choose positive concepts, so that they become as natural 
as negative beliefs once did. 
One of the greatest detriments to mental and physical well-being 
is the unfortunate belief that any unfavorable situation is bound to get 
worse instead of better. (Pause.) That concept holds that any illness 
will worsen, any war will lead to destruction, that any and all known 
dangers will be encountered, and basically that the end result of 
mankind's existence is extinction. All of those beliefs impede mental 
and physical health, erode the individual's sense of joy and natural 
safety, and force the individual to feel like an unfortunate victim of 
exterior events that seem to happen despite his own will or intent. 
(4:39.) Comments. 
The ideas I have just mentioned are all prominent in your society, and now and then they return to darken your senses of joy and 
expectation. 
Today Ruburt experienced a small-enough, but still potent 
enough, recurrence of those ideas. It is very important that they be 
recognized when they appear. For now, often that recognition alone 
can clear your thoughts and mind. 
(Longpause.) You had your own experiences last evening: your 
foreknowledge of your friend's phone call, and the unorthodox 
THE PURPOSE OF THIS BOOK 
• 11 • 
(long pause) knowledge about the money — and those two events 
happened because you did indeed want another small assurance of 
the mind's capabilities despite the official concepts of the mind, by 
which you are so often surrounded. 
Such experiences let you taste, again, the feeling of your own 
greater abilities and freedom. Tell Ruburt to remind himself again 
that he is free to move and to walk normally. 
("Can I ash a question?") 
You may. 
( "You3re saying that to some extent at least, he still feels that he isn't free 
to move and walk I've thought of this several times myself lately.") 
I am saying that to varying degrees those concepts sometimes 
return, that it should be obvious that this happens less and less. 
Remind him also to remember that he does not have any particular 
disease. Society would be much better off if man labeled multitudinous levels of physical health rather than dignifying negative concepts by giving them names and designations. 
Now, I may or may not return, again according to those rhythms 
of which I speak — but know that I am present and approachable. 
We will shortly be finished with Chapter One. It should be a 
simple matter to separate personal material from book dictation. 
("Yes, Okay." 
(4:48 P.M. "Well, "Jane said with a sigh, "I'm glad I had a session." 
("Well," I joked, "at least you did something useful today. " She had a 
cigarette. The supper tray came. As we talked before I turned her on her left 
side, I said that I felt she still did not feel entirely free to walk, that something — some beliefs, or set of them — still held her back. I've been conscious of this feeling of my own for some time, and have thought of 
mentioning it at times. I didn yt want to overdo it, either. 
("Well, whatever it is, "Jane said with some desperation, "I've got to get 
over it... 
" 
(While she ate I told Jane of another question I'd had in mind for some 
time, and asked that Seth comment: Our situation, for which we're both 
responsible, is one of extremes. That is, it seems that we could achieve the 
same results with less exaggera ted, less damaging extremes of behavior. Why 
did we have to go so far? I've always wondered about this. I granted that 
one could always say that the same end couldn V be achieved by riot going as 
• D<± • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
far, but then, I told Jane, if one followed that line of reasoning to its logical 
conclusion, physical death would result — that state would be the final 
extreme of any form of behavior 
(It wasn 9t until I was ready to leave 330 that I realized I hadn 7 asked 
Seth to comment on my dream of the night before — involving our returning to the Potter apartment-house in Sayre. It looks like we'll have plenty of 
questions lined up for you-know-who. 
(It was snowing as I went out to the car Not as badly as last night, 
though, when I'd had to be quite careful driving home. 
(Jane called, with nurse Carta's help, as I finished this session after 
10:00rm.) 
JANUARY 1 0 , 1 9 8 4 
4:30 P.M. TUESDAY 
(I'm typing this session on May 23, 1985. My friend, Debbie Harris, 
found the original in notebook #39 when she was copying it for Yale University Library. I'd evidently laid the notes aside to type the next day because 
I was so busy, then forgot to type them. I seem to have a vague memory abou t 
this. I think it's the first time I ever skipped typing a session that way. 
(How strange — here I am, typing another session from my notes, 
when I thought that part of my life was over — that I'd never have another 
session to type. I wish there were more of them to do. Jane has been dead for 
259 days. 
(This material came through after Jane and I had watched a program 
yesterday and today called In Search Of — old reruns featuring Leonard 
Nimoy. I don't recall the shows. In my original notes I had noted that 
today's "session material was quite unexpected." 
(Jane obviously gave this material from her hospital bed in Room 330.) 
Now: I bid you another fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
A few comments. 
There are many, many species that man has not discovered, in all 
the categories of life — insects onward. 
There are multitudinous species of viruses and so forth that man 
has not encountered and recognized, and there are connections 
between viruses and other species of living matter that remain 
unknown. There are indeed two different kinds of upward-walking 
THE PURPOSE OF THIS BOOK 
• 11 • 
mammals, much like your own species, but much larger, and with infinitely keener senses. They are indeed amazingly swift creatures, and 
through scent alone they are aware of the presence of man when any 
member of your species is at all in the immediate area — standing, 
say, at least several miles away. Vegetable matter is a main diet, though 
often implemented by insects, which are considered a delicacy. 
They have, for that matter, devised many ingenious insect traps, so 
that hundreds or more can be caught, for many are needed since 
insects are so small. These traps are often constructed on trees, in the 
bark, in such a fashion that the tree gum itself is used to trap the insects. 
The traps appear to be part of the tree itself, so as to protect them. 
These creatures clo indeed remember, but their remembering 
operates extremely rapidly — a kind of almost instantaneous deduction that comes as sense data is interpreted. That is, received and 
interpreted almost at once, or simultaneously. 
(Pause at 4:40.) Offspring do not occur until the individuals are 
well past the age that you would consider normal for breeding. Otherwise the procedure is the same. With some territorial variation, 
such creatures reside in many of the world areas on your planet, 
though their overall population is very small — altogether, perhaps, 
several thousand. They rarely congregate in large groups, but do 
have a family and tribal-like organization, with at the very most 
twelve adults in any given area. As offspring are added, the groups 
break up again, for they know well that in larger numbers they would 
be much more easy to discover. 
They all use tools of one kind or another, and live indeed in close 
concord with the animals. There is no competition between them 
and animals, for example, and they are not basically aggressive, 
though they could be extremely dangerous if they were cornered, or 
if their young were attacked. 
They grow quite sluggish in wintertime, in very cold climates, 
and their temperature drops, as is characteristic of hibernating animals, except that their temperature is more sensitive to daily variations, so that on some winter days they can forage for food very well, 
while on the other hand they may hibernate for even weeks on end. 
(4:46.) They have a keen understanding of nature, and of natural 
phenomena. Language is not developed to any great degree, for 
their sensual ordinary equipment is so pure and swift that it almost 
• D<± • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
becomes a language of its own, and does not need any elaboration. 
Those senses possess their own variances, so that without any word 
such as "now" or "then," the creatures are able to know quite accurately how many living creatures are in the vicinity, how long they 
have been there (pause) — and their experience with time is one that 
follows the seasons in such a way that they have formed a wordless, 
fairly accurate picture of the world, including navigational direction. 
I am mentioning this material because of the program you saw 
today, and also because I knew of your interest. 
The new relationship with Prentice-Hall should work very well. 
Now you are considered quite respectable (pause), that you have survived so many changes within that publishing organization. 
Your dream about the return to Sayre, and the more spacious surroundings, means also that as you now change the past and the 
future, so you have changed the past: you view it in a more extended 
light, so that it becomes less narrow and constricting. Then from that 
new past, in certain terms, the new present and future emerge — a 
fascinating phenomenon. 
Should be phenomenon. (Rick) 
Now, I may or may not return, according to those reasons with 
which you are beginning to grow acquainted, but know that I am 
present and approachable. 
("Thankyou very much, Seth." 
(4:55 P.M. *I should tell you,"Jane said as I lit a smoke for her, "but as 
soon as that program ivas over, I knew he was going to mention the Abominable Snowman. But I thought it would be maybe a few lines — I didn't 
expect that much." I hadn't expected any. The TV show had ended at 
3:00 P.M. Jane also said she "saw," or remembered, what the insect trap 
looked like, bu t she couldn't make a drawing of it. She said she didn't wan t 
to mislead me, but that the traps reminded her of spider webs, the way the 
insects became trapped in them. 
(5:00 P.M. "Don't be worried — I'm not going to go on with the session, but as he said, you always go back and change the past from the present— your focus point, you know — I know what he's going to say 
next. . . " I said she tuas welcome to resume the session. 
(I had to ask Jane to repeat what she said because the Russian patient 
in the room next door, Karina, was yelling out in the hall, as she has been 
all afternoon. Quite distracting. She's still at it. The girl who brought the 
THE PURPOSE OF THIS BOOK 
• 11 • 
supper tray at the end of the session left our room door open, and Karina 
sounded all the louder.: 
(Added on Wednesday, January 11, 1984: We'd like more on changing 
the past from the present. Today Jane and I sort of disagreed [I think] on 
what Seth was saying. She seems to think the actual episode of Father 
Darren chasing her around the bed when she was in that hotel room with 
him as a teen-ager is changed, whereas I thought Seth meant that the original event remained, but that her psychological understanding of what had 
transpired changed a good deal. There is a difference here. Jane doesn't 
create a reality in which the even t is absent from her memory, or never happened, that I know of 
(Seth didn't mention this in his short session of Wednesday, January 
11, and I neglected to ask him about it.) 
JANUARY 11,1984 
4:23 RM. WEDNESDAY 
(I haven't typed yesterday's session, on Sasquatch. I had to shovel the 
driveway — about four inches of snow — since snow had fallen most of the 
day, and I didn't want a mess out there today. Jane called me last night, 
courtesy of Carla, and she said Debbie Harris also visited. Debbie is a true 
friend indeed. 
(Yesterday's session was mainly on the Sasquatch phenomenon, triggered I imagine by the program In Search Of, and I'll probably take time 
off from Dreams one morning to get it done. That's complicated at the 
moment because I'm already taking time off from Dreams each morning 
now, to work on 1983 tax figures. But we'll make it. 
(This morning [and last night when I got home] the furnace was 
making so much noise that I called our plumber to come check it out. I left 
the garage door open for him, as promised, so he could get in the house in 
the afternoon when I wasn't there. Miracle of miracles — when the heat 
came on tonight the furnace was so quiet I couldn't believe it. It's always 
been noisy to some extent, but lately has been much worse. 
(Last night in the mail I found Carol Steiner's Ph.D. thesis on the Seth 
material, which she'd promised in November. We knew a year ago she was 
writing this for her doctorate in philosophy. Quite in teresting, but as I told 
Jane, it reminded me of just what a task it is to start at the beginning and 
• D<± • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
present an explanation of the Seth material From our viewpoint I suppose 
it seems like mare is left unsaid than said — but this may always be true in 
such cases. Carol wan ts to publish the work, and asks about a Butts-Roberts 
biography — something I think we'll probably pass upon. FU write our publisher, Prentice-Hall 
(Jane ate a good lunch. She tried re-reading the session for January 9, 
but had trouble. Her eyes kept changing; at times she could see well Seth has 
mentioned this acclimatization of the eye muscles. Most of the timeJane had 
trouble, trying to read around being given her vitals, and finally she gave 
up. We forgot to ask Carta what my wife's temperature was. I made an 
attempt to answer the mail, but didn't do well The time seemed to be gone 
before we could get anything done. 
(I did remind Jane that in yesterday's session Seth hadn't addressed the 
question I'd mentioned to her at lunch time — why were we such extremists 
in our behavior, considering the severity of the symptoms, and so forth ? Jane 
did want to have a session this afternoon.) 
Now: I bid you another fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
I have the following comments. 
Your situations can be called extreme — but true extremes are 
far less fortunate. You have, for example, the extremes of poverty suffered by people in many other parts of the world — a poverty that 
stunts all kinds of growth, mental and physical, and brings about an 
early death. Or the extremes of disease, in which children are born 
without all the faculties needed for life, and — therefore also die an 
early death. Or those extremes when entire families suffer patterns 
of tragedy so whole numbers are wiped out at one time. 
There are reasons for such cases, of course. I simply wanted you 
to know that many very severe extremes exist, that would make your 
lives seem most favorable in contrast. Since you both have such 
mental agility and a history in this life of health and vitality, that history can be used by Ruburt, if he recalls himself running up and 
down the steps of the art gallery, for example. His mind and body 
both must recognize the validity of those motions, so that there 
should be no contradictory material to block it. 
The mental exercise of seeing himself vigorously cleaning 
the apartments at 458 (where we used to live on W. Water Street), or the 
THE PURPOSE OF THIS BOOK 
• 11 • 
rooms at the hill house (where we live noiv), can also be used most 
advantageously. 
I may or may not return, again according to those rhythms of 
which I speak — but know that I am present and approachable. 
f Okay." 
(4:30 P.M. Jane felt better. I told her that Seth didn't go into our questions about his material in yesterday's session, concerning changing the 
past from the present, nor did he comment on Carol Steiner's Ph.D. thesis on 
the Seth material. I'd showed it to Jane, of course, but she hadn'I been able 
to read it. 
(In the session notes for January 9, I'd noted that I still felt that something ivas holding Jane back from feeling free to walk, in spite of all the 
advances we've made. Seth hadn't mentioned this is yesterday's session [for 
the 10 th], and now I asked Jane if she had any insight into that question. 
I wasn't even sure I was right. 
(I was getting my stuff together preparatory to leaving for the evening 
when Jane said she'd been thinking it over, and had something to tell me. It 
turned out that she was — is — impaired in feeling free to walk because of 
her broken right leg, she said. 
(Then she revealed that more and more she's worrying about why the 
right leg looks so much shorter than the left one. It doesn 'I seem possible to 
her that she'll be able to walk on it even if she does straighten it out. We 
talked for a little while. I'm afraid the talk didn't make her feel any better. 
I've known for some time that a problem exists there as to why the leg is 
shorter-looking. "But then," I said, "we're not supposed to think that way. 
We're supposed to have the confidence that the body knows what it's doing, 
and will fix that leg in whatever manner is necessary." Jane agreed, of 
course, but I could see she was quite upset. 
(I said she may have to get a medical opinion, but that I felt that if they 
wanted to X-ray the leg tomorrow, she'd say no. I would dearly love to see the 
leg begin to relax, to straighten out to at least a degree. I'm terribly concerned at the stresg involved in her holding the right leg so doubled up 
against her groin. As I said, I still don't really know why the body has to do 
this. That even if the bones had been weakened by prolonged stress, with her 
improved appetite and attitude, that danger period should be at least somewhat alleviated by now. No more bones have broken. 
(In short, Jane, the right leg is evidently to play a central role in your 
• D<± • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
recovery — not only a physical one, but a vital one concerning changes in 
belief about the whole thing. Ironic indeed, I thought as I drove home, if the 
broken leg would serve as the last, final impetus toward clearing our psyches 
of the last of the old, damaging beliefs, so that the new synthesis can finally 
take place: the body can heal itself. . . 
(Jane called at 10:10 tonight, with Carta's help, just as I was finishing 
typing the session. She said she still didn't feel a whole helluva lot better. I 
tried to cheer her up — and myself as well.) 
JANUARY 12,1984 
4:02 P.M. THURSDAY 
(The day was very colcl — only 12 degrees at noon. I stopped at the 
bank to buy a check and a money order for Blue Cross and the monthly hospital payment on our old MIL When I got to 330Jane told me about her 
dream, which she had not long after I left last night. 
(In the dream she was in a bathtub, without water, talking to her 
mother whom she could not see. This was followed by "a very sensual" 
episode she cannot recall at all. Then she stood in a room letting her hair 
down. She thinks this means that symbolically she's uletting her hair down " 
as she continues to learn. 
(Jane was "blue and nervous" this morning, but talked herself out of it. 
She ate a good lunch. I had yesterday's session typed, and she tried several 
times to read it without success — even after I'd given her eyedrops, she just 
couldn't do it today. I finally read the session to her, finishing at 3:33. 
(Afterward, as we talked, Jane agreed to look in the mirror, which I 
have had available in 330for some months. At first she was afraid to, but 
it wen t well — with only a little catch in her throat she faced herself, and 
did very well at it. The main point we agreed on was that using a mirror 
meant one less important hassle to deal with; she'd be hiding that much less 
from herself. 
(We put on lipstick and she looked very good, with her fine skin and 
lack of wrinkles that most people her age have. She's 54.1 told her she looked 
remarkably well. Her hair also looks good — curling and alive. I said if it 
was clyed, as she used to do, that she'cl look fine, just like her old self. I also 
suggested she look in the mirror, at least briefly each day, and that soon 
there would be nothing to it. She might even get to look forward to seeing 
herself continue to improve. 
THE PURPOSE OF THIS BOOK 
• 11 • 
(Jane tried to read the session again, but soon gave up. I remarked that 
if she had a session today I'd like it to be on what we'd talked about before I 
left last night — her right leg, and related challenges. I also wanted Seth to 
comment on the last paragraph I'd written for yesterday's session. I thought 
I had a good idea there, and Jane agreed. She also wants me to bring in an 
eyebrow pencil, so she can use that with her lipstick. 
(Finally, Jane got tired of waiting for people to do her vitals, and 
decided to start the session. 
(Karina was hollering out in the hall, around the corner, and had been 
doing so steadily ever since I got there .) 
Now: I bid you another fond good afternoon. 
f"Good afternoon, Seth." 
(Long pause.) It may be far more pleasant to be good-humored 
all of the time — but in Ruburt's situation the fairly infrequent periods of blueness do indeed operate therapeutically, so that he is able 
to express those feelings through tears, and therefore relieve the 
body of expressing the same feelings through additional symptoms. 
(Someone asked from the doorway: "Is Sharon in there?" 
("Nope," I said. Jane stayed in trance.) 
There is a certain residue, in other words (pause) of fairly desolate feelings — and these are working themselves out through such 
expression, thus freeing the body for additional improvements. He 
(as Seth sometimes addresses Jane, because of her male entity name, Ruburt) 
progresses at a certain rate, for example, and encounters some blockages, due to doubts and fears. These are then released and expressed 
through tears or through a recognized period of blueness. Then the 
system is cleared again, and the way clear for more improvements. 
In the past, the body itself was depressed (a very important point), 
running at low gear, and this is certainly not the case now. Each time, 
of course, the period of blueness is briefer, the system cleared more 
quickly, and the new improvements also show themselves at a 
quicker rate. 
(Longpause at 4:10.) This is now, at least, a natural casting-off of 
old doubts and fears, but in such a way that they are recognized and 
then let go. 
(Longpause.) The changing condition of the eyes shows the kind 
of cycles that occur: the upper edges, so to speak, of improvements 
continue, so that each new improvement is, obviously, superior to 
• D<± • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
the last. But in the meantime there is much variation, unevenness, 
and times when the vision is quite unclear. Those changes do indeed 
seem mysterious. Ruburt is not looking at his own eyes all of the 
time — so that mysteriousness is somehow taken for granted. He 
understands so little about the eyes' operation to begin with, that he 
does not bother to figure out, or try to figure out, the order that such 
improvements should take, or how they should happen. 
The right leg is immediately before his vision, however — it is 
highly visible, so that he often compares its position unfavorably with 
that of the other leg. This is bound to lead him to consider those 
impediments that seem to be in the way. The body can heal the leg as 
easily as it can heal the eyes, and as easily as it can heal the bedsores. 
It is a good idea for now not to concentrate upon that leg, or 
what it must do eventually in order for walking to take place. It might 
help if now and then he imagines his walking taking place as easily 
and naturally as his thoughts come and go, and in ways as mysterious 
as the way his vision operates, when it is suddenly clearer, and he 
reads so much more quickly — for the quick reading will soon be 
the norm. 
It is indeed a step forward that he looked in the mirror today — 
a very important issue — and so is your suggestion that he do so 
briefly every day — and smiles (amused). 
It shows he is ready to encounter himself, and at least willing to 
look kindly upon himself. Of course, the lipstick is an excellent idea, 
and the eyebrow pencil, so that he begins to care for his face as he 
used to. The face's expression accurately reflects the inner selfimage, as odd as it may seem. A smile, even when he does not feel 
like smiling, builds up the self-image, and affects the entire bodily 
condition. 
Ruburt has already been healed of conditions quite as complicated as the leg that was broken. 
I may or may not return — but know indeed that I am present 
and approachable, and that I hold both of you in my attention. 
("Can I ask a question?") 
You may. 
("Do you want to say something about our discussion yesterday, about 
changing the past from the present?" Ifelt that Seth tvas bound to agree with 
Jane's version of what he'd said, rather than mine. 
THE PURPOSE OF THIS BOOK 
• 11 • 
(4:25.) It is very difficult to explain, because what actually happens is sometimes so directly contrary to what seems to have happened. You do not simply change, or enlarge, your ideas or beliefs 
about the past — but you change the events of the past themselves 
for yourself, and sometimes for others also. 
It might help if you remember that despite appearances all 
events are basically subjective. Their "objectivity" happens at a certain point of focus, and as — 
(4:27. A new nurse came in to take Jane's temperature — 98.3. 
Karina had been yelling throughout the session — so much so that at times 
I9d almost missed what Seth had been saying. 
(A moment later Shawn Peterson came in to say hello. I made the mistake of asking how her husband was, since Fd thought about asking yesterday, but hadn't. Shawn launched into a long account of her husband's 
latest troubles. Yesterday the two of them had spen t a day at the hospital in 
Sayre. With the best intentions, her account reflected all the negative beliefs 
about illness that Jane and I had come to expect in the hospital setting. 
After Shaivn left, I read to Jane her material from 4:25.) 
— that focus changes, so do the events. 
(4:44 P.M. That was it, although Jane said she had more material 
available. It was time to turn her. The situa tion was somewha t frus tra ting, 
since Fd looked forward to some good material in changing the past from 
the present; I hadn't wanted the question to be forgotten. 
(Maybe more on it tomorrow, Jane said at last. Karina had definitely 
been a bother this afternoon, and she was still calling out, her voice hoarse 
and much weaker. I told Jane I thought she sounded like she was reliving a 
reversion to her childhood. The staff people had tried to calm her down at 
various times, to no avail. Jane said their actions made her feel bad, 
because it reminded her of when she'd had her own panic feelings, and 
people had tried to calm her down in her early days in the hospital Now, 
Jane said "cancel" to herself after she'd told me her feelings.) 
JANUARY 13,1984 
3:37 RM. FRIDAY 
(Jane looked at herself in the mirror today after lunch — the second day 
in a row that she's done so. These events are the first like them in well over 
a year, she estimated. They also had their humorous side, since today she 
• D<± • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
barely looked at her image, then afterward told me that her hair was white. 
It isn% of course. "Well, I got that over with," she said with obvious relief 
after I'd handed her the mirror not long after getting to 330.1gave her her 
lipstick also, which she applied without trouble. 
(The day was warmer at about 22 degrees. This morning Pel prepared 
payments for insurance and the hospital. Karina is much quieter today — 
so far. I said I wouldn't mind Seth commenting on her, 
(Jane ate a good lunch. A nurse's aide brought us a copy of the regular 
menu, compared to the one for soft foods that Jane has always used, and ive 
discovered that there isn 'I all that much difference betioeen the two. 
(2:35. Jane began reading yesterday's session, and obviously did better 
than she had yesterday. I helped her in some spots. At 2:50 she quit for a 
cigarette while on page three. Then she told me of her dream. In the first 
part, she saw in a mirror that she had pink beads which she tried on to see 
how they'd go with the blouse she was wearing — blouse color unknown. In 
the second part, she was on her back in bed when her right hip did something and then her legs were equal in length in her vision. She doesn't know 
what she did. I said it sounded as though the dream state was giving her 
information on healing and motion. The leg data were especially important. 
(3:20 Jane finished reading the session aloud, and did very well at it, 
especially toward the end. I answered mail while she had another cigarette 
before the session. She'd decided not to wait for people to do her vitals. When 
she asked me if I could sort out Seth's book material from his personal stuff, 
I said it was easy — that I wasn't concerned at all. 
("You know why ?"I asked her. "Becauseyou're going to do all the work 
on the book. When you get home, so start getting ready. I've always known you 
were going to do the book. I'll do an intro if you want, and you can too, or 
you-know-who can also — but you 're going to be the one who does that book." 
(My little speech got her talking about it and related matters, and she 
soon felt Seth around. She put out her cigarette early, in fact.) 
Now I bid you another most fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
Apropos of our discussion concerning time. 
The nature of universal creativity is so remarkable that its true 
reaches are literally beyond most understanding. The implications 
are staggering — so that the affair is almost impossible to explain. 
The past, and every moment of the past, are being constantly 
THE PURPOSE OF THIS BOOK 
• 11 • 
changed from the operation point of the present. In your terms, the 
present becomes the past, which is again changed at every considerable point from the latest-present — you may put a hyphen between 
the last two words, so that the meaning is clear. Yet through all of this 
immense, continuous creation, there is always a personal sense of 
continuity: You never really lose your way in the distance between 
one moment and the next — 
(3:43. One of the nurses popped in on her way home to tell us that Georgia Cecce had just been admitted to the hospital — "Down the hall, in room 
307." We've known Georgia, Jane's favorite nurse, ever since my wife 
entered the hospital in April, 1983. 
("Every time we get on this subject something happens," I said. I read 
to Jane what she'd just given so far. "Is that clear?" 
("Yes," she said. Resume at 3:46.) 
In somewhat of the same fashion the objects about you are constantly in motion, as you know. The atoms and molecules are forever 
moving, and in a way the electrons are the directors of that motion. 
Your own focus is so precisely and finely tuned that despite all of 
that activity, objects appear solid. Period. Now objects are also 
events, and perhaps that is the easiest way to understand them. They 
are highly dependent upon your own subjective focus. Let that focus 
falter for a briefest amount of time, and the whole house of cards 
would come tumbling down, so to speak. 
Remember that you are also objects, and also events, and as physical bodies your organs are also composed of atoms and molecules 
whose motion, again, is directed by the electrons. 
(Long pause at 3:52.) The electrons themselves have their own 
subjective lives. They are also subjective events, therefore, so there is 
always a correlation between those electrons in yovir bodies and 
those in the objects you see about you. Nevertheless again, subjective 
continuity itself never falters, in that it is always a part of the world 
that it perceives, so that you and the world create each other, in 
these terms. 
When you change the past from each point of the latest-present, 
you are also changing events at the most microscopic levels. Your intent 
has also an electronic reality, therefore. It is almost as if your thoughts 
punched the keys of some massive computer, for your thoughts do 
• D<± • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
indeed have a force. New sentence: Even as sentences are composed 
of words, there is no end to the number of sentences that can be 
spoken — so "time" is composed of an endless variety of electronic 
languages that can "speak" a million worlds instead of words. 
Now I may or may not return, according to those rhythms of 
which I speak, but know that I am "present" and approachable. 
("May I ask a question?") 
You may. 
("How about saying something about Karina?"I'd heard the Russian 
lady sounding off a few times this afternoon during the session.) 
Take your break. 
(4:00. Jane had a cigarette. "He means he'll be back," she said. "I 
thought that stuff on time was fantastic. There's something you have when 
you 're doing it that you don't have ivhen you read it afterward, when you 're 
outside of it. When you 're doing it you 're inside of it." 
("You mean you feel it," I said, and she agreed. I've often thought of 
how weak our current theories are to explain what we see around us, or in 
the night sky. 
(4:05-4:10. Lynn came in to do all of Jane's vitals. Temperature 98. 
We talked about Karina, in the room on the other side of the bathroom 
between rooms. Lynn thinks Karina is disoriented, although some of the 
doctors don't. We speculated as to why Karina has never learned any language other than Russian. Lynn said the hospital even has a list of Russian words, but that Karina doesn't respond adequately to them — perhaps 
they 're poorly pronounced, say. 
(I told Jane after Lynn left that she could continue with the material on 
time if she preferred. Resume at 4:21.) 
Dates are but designations applied to the days. 
Mankind lived without such designations for a much longer 
period than he has used them. Animals, without such designations, 
still know their position on the planet itself, and they are aware of 
the tides and the movement of the earth and planets. 
(Long pause.) Karina has that same kind of orientation. At this 
point in her life, she has actually refused to concentrate upon languages, which would tend to tie her more tightly to the details of the 
world. (Longpause, one of many.) She does "return to the past," remaking it more to her liking. Her latest-present is beginning to show signs 
THE PURPOSE OF THIS BOOK 
• 11 • 
of a deterioration. She wants a turning-off point from which to construct other realities, so it is not so much that the latest-present is 
deteriorating as much as the fact that she is purposely letting her 
attention wander, and allowing the latest-presents (with the hyphen) 
to diminish in strength and vitality. She will of course construct a new 
form from which to operate. 
Now I may or may not return, but know again that I am present 
and approachable (with humor. 
("Thankyou very much." 
(4:32 P.M. Jane had a cigarette. Yesterday had been one of Karina's 
bad days — her luorst, in fact, as far as we could tell. She'd cried out unintelligible words steadily all afternoon, until finally her voice had begun to 
falter and crack by supper time. It had been more than a little disturbing. 
At the time I'd wondered if she was on the downgrade, for I didn't remember her calling out so steadily in weeks past. I'd thought her driving herself 
until she was hoarse was a late — or last — confrontation with a world 
that she might soon be leaving. . .) 
JANUARY 1 4 , 1 9 8 4 
4:31 P.M. SATURDAY 
(The day is warm — 33 degrees — and the snow and ice are melting. 
This morning I worked on the final copy of our 1983 taxes, and will mail 
them to our accountant Monday morning. I brought Jane's eyebrow pencil 
to her at 330. 
(3:15. Jane looked at herself in the mirror after she put on lipstick. She 
even smiled — "Since I'm supposed to"— and did well. I darkened her 
brows with the pencil, and she looked fine. 
(3:25.1 went down the hall to 307 to see Georgia, but she was asleep. 
I'd looked in while passing this noon; her bed had been empty, although two 
people had sal in the room talking. 
(3:32. Jane finished her cigarette and I worked on mail. 
(3:45. Jane began reading yesterday's session, and did very well indeed 
to start. Her reading was very fast. She was interrupted by people taking her 
vitals — temperature 97.3. By 3:57 she went back to the session — but 
now her pace wasn't as fast and sure. She said her eyes were changing. 
(4:02. Jane stopped reading. She could hardly make out the session. A 
• D<± • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
little later she resumed reading sporadically. All of these changes were an 
excellent demonstration of the tvay Seth has said her eyes are behaving as 
they move up to a netu plateau of improved vision. 
(4:07. Jane took a break from reading for a cigarette. She resumed at 
4:19, and finished the session, doing better at the end. 
(4:25. Now she told me how earlier today she'd imagined herself visiting Enfield Glen. * She said she did very well thinking of herself walking 
and climbing around the park and the pool — but then she ended up blue, 
thinking of all she had to go through yet before she could do those things. 
"So it's tricky as hell to clo all that stuff and not let yourself slide over the 
edge," she said. I said it was okay to slide over the edge, if you realized what 
was happening and took steps to not get carried away into a depressed mood 
by it. Nobody's perfect, nor do we even need perfection. 
(Karina was mostly quiet today, although sounding off at times. Jane's 
Seth voice was stronger and more positive than usual, I thought, with considerable emphasis at times.) 
Now, I bid you another fond good afternoon — 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
— and I am making myself known but briefly in order to accelerate those coordinates that are so beneficial for the progression of 
healing energy. 
Ruburt did very well with his mental exercises — unusually well 
except for a few instances, when he did allow self-pity to grab ahold. 
It is extremely important that he concentrate upon those pleasures 
of life that he does enjoy. Eating good food, experiencing, again, the 
joy of reading, the joy of creative thought, the pleasure of friends, 
and so forth, for those benefits will then be increased more than a 
hundredfold. 
All the improvements necessary are indeed happening at various 
levels of activity within his mental and physical experience. Following 
as he has been, he will indeed be able to stand on his own two feet, 
and to walk with some confidence. He must, however, have faith that 
this is so — and again, without worrying about how it will happen. 
*Enfield Glen is the local name for Robert Treman State Park. It's located near 
Ithaca, New York, some 35 miles from both Elmira and Sayre. The Butts family spent 
many a happy summer camping there. Jane is from Saratoga Springs, in upstate New 
York. The beautiful Glen is the first place I took her to after our engagement in 1955. 
THE PURPOSE OF THIS BOOK 
• 11 • 
The conscious mind can direct bodily activity (long pause), but 
the body consciousness alone can perform those activites that bring 
forth life and motion. 
I may or may not return, according to those rhythms of which I 
speak, but know again that I am present and approachable. 
("Thank you.w 
(4:37 P.M. I told Jane the little session was excellent, as indeed it is. I 
thought it contained very positive and hopeful material — for some reason 
it really hit home. Jane was pleased too, and I reread it to her after supper. 
(While we were eating the phone rang. It was John Bumbalo, our neighbor who lives across the street from our hill house. He invited me to a late 
supper with his girl, Lisa. I'm finishing typing this session now at 
8:15 P.M., preparatory to going across Pinnacle Road. Sleep well, Jane. I 
love you.) 
JANUARY 15,1984 
4:41 RM. SUNDAY 
(Last night had been very cold, and it was still only 18 degrees when I 
left for 330 this noon. This morning I finished the final statements for our 
1983 taxes. The rest of the time I worked on Dreams. Interruptions, 
though, leave me feeling that Tm way far away from what I want to do 
when I first return to a project. 
(Jane said Georgia Cecce was in to see her this morning, and to borrow 
another pack of cigarettes. A nurse by the name of Gaye ivashed Jane's hair 
this morning; I told my wife it looked good. Jane looked in the mirror and 
didn't agree, although she did admit that her hair wasn't white, but gray 
and white. Jane went through the motions of smiling into the mirror, after 
she'd put on lipstick. Gaye had darkened her brows with the eyebrow pencil 
earlier this morning. 
(After lunch Jane told me that she'd had a new catheter inserted at 
about 3:30 this morning. No trouble. But she needed the new one after the 
new girl on the floor had pulled it loose several times while taking care of 
her. No hydro this morning. 
(Jane, with Carla's help, tried to call me twice last night, but I didn't 
get back to the house from John Bumbalo's until about midnight. We had 
an excellent supper. I woke up stewing around 3:00, and got up for about 
• D<± • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
an hour before returning to bed. The pendulum told me I was fretting about 
losing time on Dreams. 
(2:50. Jane began reading yesterday's session, and did quite well. She 
was done at 3:05 after a good read. She had a smoke while I tried to concentrate upon mail, but I didn't do well I was sleepy. 
(From 4:00 to 4:07people came in to take her vitals — temperature 99, 
up a bit, but Jane felt okay. I was beginning to think she wouldn't have a 
session when she told me to get my paper.) 
Now: I bid you another fond good afternoon. 
("The same to you, Seth.") 
I am announcing myself briefly once more in order to better activate those coordinates that are so important in the healing processes. 
It is an excellent idea for Ruburt to tell his arms and legs that it 
is perfectly safe for them to straighten out, to stretch and flex, and to 
use their normal capacity for motion. The suggestion is highly valuable, and he is using it well. The hands are indeed beginning to 
accelerate their improvements — the right one in particular, so that 
the fingers begin to uncurl. 
The rapid changes in the eye motions demonstrate the rapidity 
of muscular action and reaction that takes places in all other portions of the body as well. 
It would be a good idea once or twice for him to remember the 
Jungle Gym (in Webster, New York where my younger brother Bill and his 
family live), and the first time he remembered faltering in a physical 
fashion. If he can, then have him imagine himself not faltering, but 
continuing on. In that way he also repairs the past. If he has difficulty 
with the exercise, however, then let it go, but continue with the safety 
suggestions. 
I may or may not return, again according to those rhythms of 
which I speak — but know that I am present and approachable. 
("Okay. Thank you." 
(4:47 p.m. Earlier this afternoon Jane had showed me how the curledup fingers of her right hand had indeed loosened up to some extent. I'd 
applied Remedy Rescue Cream to the knuckles of both hands. I've also been 
aware, for some time, of changes taking place on the wrist and the back of 
her left hand. When I turned her before supper this evening, her right arm 
moved quite freely and loosely at the elbow. The right knee also flexes better 
and better. So these invaluable changes continue to happen. 
THE PURPOSE OF THIS BOOK 
• 11 • 
(I left Jane at 7:07 after reading the prayer with her. I waved to Georgia 
in 307 on my way out. She had company so I didn't stop. 
(Both of us instantly remembered the Jungle Gym at the lakeside park in 
Webster, where we'd first noticed Jane's faltering in physical movement 
so many years ago. Today when Seth mentioned it she hadn't seem distressed, though, so perhaps that memory can be put to good constructive use 
by us now.) 
JANUARY 1 6 , 1 9 8 4 
4:23 P.M. M O N D A Y 
(It was very cold last night, and at 6:30 this morning it was still 5 
degrees below zero. When I left for 330 this noon the temperature was barely 
10 above. I'd typed a letter to our lawyer, regarding our taxes, and mailed 
it this noon. I told Jane later that I need information about accepting gift 
money, via Maude Cardwell. I suspect such funds are taxable, so to legally 
avoid having much of any funds lost through heavy taxes, Jane and I need 
advice as to what to do. It may be, I said, that we'll never see the money. 
Maude Cardwell may have to pay bills for us, and so forth. In any case, the 
donor can take deductions, I think. 
(Jane ate a good lunch. Afterward she described a series of "experiences " 
she'd had after I left her last night. They happened at about 8:15, before 
staff people came in to turn her on her side. It's difficult to describe what she 
told me, and would take many words and much time. "I wish I could -write 
it myself," she said. She was in various altered states during some of the 
experiences, I'd say, and a dreaming one in others. 
(Jane began by finding herself as a young girl on a swing at the recreation field across the street from St. Clement's Catholic Church and School 
in Saratoga Springs, ivhere she grew up. "I looked down and saw that I 
wore black shoes and white socks, like little kids do, like I look in some of 
those old photographs. "At one time here she thought she was only four years 
old. She knew she was doing those things while at the field, she said. 
(Then she found herself in a tub of warm water, and she loasfilled with 
sexual sensual feelings, especially in the vaginal area. "I suddenly realized 
I was hallucinating the water and stuff that I was really in my hospital 
bed. Then I thought that anyway, I could have a kitten here. We have hvo 
rooms and Rob could hide the kitten, and keep a litter box hidden too — 
how I didn 'I know." 
• D<± • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
(Next, Jane said she was trying to find a radio and recorder here at our 
hill house in Elmira so that Sue Watkins, who lives an hour's drive to the 
north, could borrow it. While searching she suddenly found a lot of cubbyholes filled with trinkets that she knew were all hers, and she was very 
pleased at this knowledge. "Then the rest of the time I was involved with 
recorders." She found herself inside something like a boxcar that ivas also 
the inside chassis of a cassette-playing machine. In this chassis Jane and 
Sue were going up and clown and around beautiful, jewel-like green hills. 
"It toas fantastic." Then like a rising sun Jane saw her own enormous face 
looking down at it all — the jewel colors, Sue and herself, the vehicle. 
(Jane didn't actually see Sue during the experience — she just knew 
Sue was there, talking to her. Then the trip "got much less clear," and she 
was trying to figure out what to lend Sue. She can't remember. 
(3:10.1 cleaned Jane's glasses. She put on lipstick, then looked in the 
mirror I held up for her. She even volunteered to do this herself. She 
smiled — briefly. I laughed, telling her her behavior reminded me of our 
cats this morning, when it was so cold: Both Billy and Mitzi had barely 
stepped out onto the picnic table from the kitchen window, when they 
reversed themselves and hopped right back into the house. I doubt if my wife 
thought the comparison was humorous. 
(3:38. Jane tried to read yesterday's session, but had a lot of trouble. She 
read a little in spurts of clear vision. "Jesus, that's terrible,''she said. "It scares 
me ivhen I do that. It would scare anybody." She lay the session aside for a 
smoke. Carla took her temperature — 98.1. Diana look her blood pressure. 
(4:00. Jane tried to read the session again. No go. "It makes me mad. 
Oh — and Iforgot to tell you. They did blood work this morning. They took 
blood just for the thyroid, though, after breakfast. Other tests, they have to 
lake blood before you eat, so maybe they'll be back tomorrow morning." This 
is the first blood work in several weeks, at least. 
(4:05. Finally, I read the session to Jane. She had a cigarette before 
going into the session for today.) 
Now: I bid you another fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth." 
(With many pauses throughout:) Ruburt displayed an excellent 
example of the mobility of consciousness in last evening's experiences. 
Healing also takes place at many different levels of consciousness. (Longpause.) Ruburt's experience, all in all, touched many of 
THE PURPOSE OF THIS BOOK 
• 11 • 
those levels, facilitating the healing processes at each given level. 
The "boxcar" episode represented his living at one level of physical 
experience, even while he also existed as the giant-sized self that 
peered over the mountain top and watched his progress. An excellent portrayal — or portrait — of the infinite inner self watching 
and guiding the physical self s existence. 
(It would make a great painting. 
(4:28.) The sexual aspects of the earlier episode indeed represented the toning-up of the sexual capacities and their pleasurable 
aspects. In the very early episode, Ruburt experienced the healthy 
and joyful child's body, with its innocent spontaneity. This allowed 
him to come into touch with childhood's early vitality — and in a 
sensual manner, not just, say, as a memory. 
The excellent glowing colors also helped remind him of the 
eyes' ability to perceive bright hues, and so activated the nerves and 
muscles of the eyes, reminding them of their natural capabilities. 
The boxcar elements, beside the explanation already given, also 
represented the body as a vehicle, moving easily and swiftly. The 
entire episode shows the way that the mind derives new experience 
through using more than one level of consciousness at any given 
time. And the small trinkets that Ruburt discovered to his own 
delight represented the small but very valuable pleasures of daily life 
that he is now reclaiming. 
Now I may or may not return, again according to those rhythms 
of which I speak — but know that I am present and approachable. 
("Can I ask a question ?") 
You may. 
("What's the connection with Jane finding herself inside a recorder? 
And with Sue V9 Sue wrote the two-volume Conversations With Seth.) 
Sue represents a certain portion of Ruburt — the writing self, 
signifying that the "psychic" portions of Ruburt's personality were 
helping out the writing portions, and letting them share in the psychic knowledge and experience. 
("Is that it?991 asked after a long pause. 
("Yes,99Jane said. 
(4:38 p.m. I was a bit surprised at the ending of the session at that 
point, I told Jane, because I9d been still waiting for Seth to answer the part 
• D<± • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
of my question dealing with her being inside a recorder. Jane was surprised 
also — since she hadn't heard me ask that part of the question. I hadn't 
spoken loudly. Maybe Seth can go into it next time. I told Jane that obviously the recorder was a communication device of a kind, so the connection 
may lie there. 
(It would also be interesting to have Seth comment on the kitten, and its 
symbolism, in Jane's experience. 
(I went out to the parking lot to run up the car at 5:00, it was so cold. 
After getting back and turning Jane and massaging her with Oil of Olay, 
she showed me how her right hand is still releasing the curled-up fingers, as 
begun yesterday, She had good movement in the right elbow, quite free as far 
as it will open up, and this is increasing. I told her that the changes in the 
nodules on top of her left wrist have now decreased in size considerably, as 
they have been doing very gradually for some time now. Sleep well, Jane.) 
JANUARY 17,1984 
4:25 P.M. TUESDAY 
(The day was much warmer — 30 degrees — at noon. I had no interruptions this morning while working on Dreams — it seemed strange. 
Jane was okay in 330, already turned on her back when I got there. She did 
okay in hydro. No one came this morning to take additional blood. The 
curled-up fingers of her right hand continue to loosen. 
(I didn't see Georgia today. When I got to 330Jane told me that Karina 
had been moved to a rest home in Wellsburg, a small community a few miles 
east ofElmira. I was surprised and in a way sad for her, wondering how she 
would make out, and what problems the new place would have with her. So 
for the first time in weeks, we dicln't hear Karina cry out in Russian, or cry 
for Georgia in English. 
(3:00. Jane started to read yesterday's session. It was hard going for her, 
but she stuck with it and finally finished at 3:30.1 worked on mail, reading several great letters and answering a couple. One of them has potential — about a group of young actresses in New York City who want to read 
Seth on a series of radio shows. I plan to send their proposal and letter to 
Lynne Lumsden, our editor at Prentice-Hall. 
98.4. (4:00. A new girl — probably a floater — took Jane's temperature — 
THE PURPOSE OF THIS BOOK 
• 11 • 
(Jane said she wanted to have a session even though it was getting late. 
She also said she ivanted to read over some of the later sessions: "Because I 
need them. * She repeated this several times during the afternoon.) 
Now: I bid you another fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
In Ruburt's recent experience, he found himself inside the chassis of a recording device — signifying that instead of playing a cassette at several different speeds, he was instead, so to speak, playing 
his own consciousness at different speeds. 
He was not just listening, then, to recorded material, but he was 
himself the recorded information and a recorder upon which the 
experiences played. 
(4:28. A nurse came in to take Jane's blood pressure. She left the room 
door open when she left, so that hall noises intruded. 
(4:31.) The analogy of the many speeds of consciousness actually 
fits in well with the actual neurological sequences upon which 
consciousness plays. As you know, everything alive is conscious — 
and even so-called dead matter possesses its own variety of selfawareness. 
(Pause.) In your terms, the rhythm of some kinds of consciousness would seem exceedingly slow, so that a century might pass 
between one perception and the next. Other variations might seem 
amazingly quick — the perceptions following each other so swiftly 
that they would indeed escape your (underlined) perception entirely; 
yet in the wondrous marvels of inner nature, all of these rhythms are 
connected one to the others, and in a matter of speaking — excuse 
the pun (amused) — they each balance each other. 
It is not so much the actual rhythms that are manifested that 
make the difference in perception, but the absence of certain other 
rhythms (intently), upon which perceptions ride. 
Now I may or may not return, again according to those rhythms 
of which I have just spoken. 
("Do you want to answer my question from the session yesterday, about 
the reason for the kitten in Jane's experience?") 
The kitten merely represented wish fulfillment, in that Ruburt 
does plan to get a kitten as soon as he is home. In the experience the 
kitten was in the hospital room, and there seemed to be adjoining 
• 4 4 TH E WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
rooms, as at 458 (the address of the apartment house we'd lived in on 
W. Water Street). This signified that Ruburt was building up similarities between present and past experience, so that the kitten, appearing in the dream's present and past also, would indeed appear in 
the future. 
I am also accelerating those coordinates that are involved with 
Ruburt's healing, thus quickening those vital healing processes. 
("Thank you." 
(4:44 p.m. Jane had done well. I reread the session to her after supper. 
Also, it seems that Seth has answered all of the questions I'd thought of in 
connection with her experience of the afternoon before last. That is, without 
my going into more detail — then the questions could be endless.) 
JANUARY 18,1984 
4:29 P.M. WEDNESDAY 
(The day wasn't bad — 25 degrees as I headed for Room 330 — but a 
snowstorm was predicted for the afternoon. Jane was already on her back; 
her left shoulder had been bothering her. It was obvious that she was blue. I 
got the nurse to help me hoist her further up on the bed so she'd be more comfortable, and that seemed to help. I wasn't in any too great a mood myself 
(Then Jane told me that last night Shawn Peterson had dropped the 
bottle of Oil of Olay, and thrown away the dispenser along with the broken 
glass. The dispensers are hard to find. I asked Jane why she hadn't at once 
asked Shawn to save it, but when she remembered to some ten minutes later, 
it was too late; Shawn had cleaned up the mess and thrown it all out. For 
some reason this news served as a trigger to plunge me into a depressed 
mood of my own, which lasted for most of the afternoon. Maybe I ivas tired. 
(Then as I was fixing the tray for lunch, Peggy Gallagher, our friend 
who is a reporter for the Elmira Star-Gazette, visited and stayed through 
most of the meal I didn't feel like talking, but ive had a good visit after we 
loosened up a little. At the same time, I couldn't help wondering why Peggy 
had chosen this day to visit us, of all days. She's been very busy. 
(I worked with mail, but didn't feel like it, really. At 3:15 Jane started 
reading yesterday's session. She did pretty well — better than she had yesterday. She was interrupted by Carla and Shawn to check her vitals — temperature 99 — and finished the session ten minutes later. 
THE PURPOSE OF THIS BOOK 
• 11 • 
(3:50. aI need to read some of the earlier sessions,"Jane had said when 
I arrived, so at 3:50 she began reading the session for January 13, a good 
one, while I did mail At 4:20 she gave up reading for a cigarette and a possible session, regardless of the late hour.) 
Now: I bid you another fond good afternoon — 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
— and I am announcing myself again in order to quicken those 
coordinates that quicken the healing processes. 
You both did fairly well in handling unfavorable moods. Do not 
bother now, but when you are momentarily "down," it is then particularly important that Ruburt look in the mirror, apply the lipstick, 
and smile in whatever fashion. Sometimes a humorous aspect will 
indeed show itself, and lift his mood automatically. 
The eyes, again, show the swiftness of muscular response and 
neural activity. It is a good idea to remember that the neurological 
quickness happens in all portions of the body. The more healthy 
connections are being made in that regard, and it is true that 
Ruburt's body often feels exceedingly warm. That heat is the result 
of the body's activity being quickened. It does generate heat, and it 
is characteristic of many, if not most, healing experiences. 
Once again, it is most important that Ruburt keep his goals in 
mind, and remember that despite any given mood the healing 
process continues. His right hand also continues to improve, and he 
is doing a good job of reminding himself that it is safe for all of his 
limbs to straighten out in a normal manner — to stretch and flex 
and express their true capacity for motion and action. 
Now, I may nor may not return, again according to those rhythms 
of which I speak — but know that I am present and approachable. 
("Thank you.") 
One point I wanted to mention: Peggy Gallagher telepathically 
picked up your moods, and felt the impetus to visit. 
(4:38 P.M. As noted, I'd wondered myself about the timing of Peggy's 
visit. Until Seth mentioned it, Yd forgotten all about asking Jane to look in 
the mirror today. She had coffee and a cigarette before I turned her. I read 
the session to her before leaving at about 7:05. It was still snowing. I made 
it up the hill okay, but with hin ts of sliding around. I'll probably go shovel 
at least part of the driveway after 1 finish this.) 
• D<± • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
JANUARY 19,1984 
4:13 P.M. THURSDAY 
(The temperature was only 18 degrees lohen I got to 330. After a minor 
snow storm yesterday afternoon and last night, I'd shoveled the driveway 
late last night and early this morning. No calls this morning. I forgot to 
call our lawyer early, and when I did think of it I said to hell with it and 
continued work on Dreams. On the way to the hospital I stopped at the post 
office to mail Lynn Lumsden a copy of a fan letter we'd received, offering us 
a year's free ads in a crossword puzzle magazine. 
(I never really know what to do about such offers, and have answered 
several such lately. Then today I opened a package that contained a book of 
trance material similar to Seth's. I guess I'm supposed to say thanks and 
that it's great, to the publisher and the medium. Actually, I think those two 
people removed their material — which talks about All That Is — too far 
from its human source, its everyday contact with human personality, and 
thus produced just another psychic book. You could take six of those books, 
I thought, shuffle the names of the mediums around, and never know who 
produced ivhat. I can only think the mediums involved must be afraid of the 
emotions and implications involved. 
(Jane ate a good lunch. Then she told me to get the mirror, lipstick, and 
eyebrow pencil. When she looked into the mirror she smiled briefly, and 
showed her teeth — a lot belter than yesterday, when we didn't do it at all 
(3:00. Jane began reading yesterday's session, and did quite well She 
was through in 10 minutes or so — quite good. I did mail 
(3:33. She began to read her second session for the day, of January 17, 
and again did well 
(It came to me that what bothers me about the kind of book I opened 
today is their limited viewpoint. As limited in its way as a book on geology 
or clothing or any of innumerable others. There's no questioning mind at 
work, no new ideas or theories — merely the familiar rehash about All That 
Is, love, reincarnation, and so forth. Valid enough, perhaps, but lacking 
original insight and individuality like the Seth material has. 
(I told Jane of my dream of the night before last, in which she and I and 
Leonard Yaudes — who had been our doiunstairs neighbor at 458 — 
moved into an apartment together at 458. In the dream the rooms were 
larger and better kept than they really are. I told Jane I suspected the dream 
grew out of my meeting Leonard at the new Super-Duper market the other 
night, when he'd joked around and repeated several times how good he felt 
THE PURPOSE OF THIS BOOK 
• 11 • 
physically, after his heart operation. Jane said she thought the dream meant 
that the three of us were all embarked on a journey into belter health, a belter 
outlook on life. 
(3:42. After Shawn look her temperature — 97.2 — Jane began reading 
her third session for the day — that of fanuary 14 — and did even belter 
on this one, fast and easy, Ifelt. She was interrupted by staff giving her eyedrops and taking her blood pressure, and finished tha t session a t 4:02. She 
said the type has been "as good as any I've ever seen — it cleared up amazingly at times." This after I9d realized she was indeed doing very well reading. 
(4:05. She had a cigarette, and told me that both hands were still 
improving and changing. "Fd like it to be quicker, but I know they are.") 
Now: I bid you another fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.w 
(With humor:) Dictation. (Pause.) If any of you, my readers, are in 
poor health, or generally unhappy, no one is asking you to pretend 
that those conditions do not exist. I hope to show you that even 
those unfortunate situations were created out of a misdirected good 
intent. In this book we will keep reminding you, however, that exuberance and high spirits are a natural part of your heritage. 
We also hope to allow you to recapture those feelings, if you have 
lost them (long pause), and to give other ways of keeping those emotions fresh and intact. Readers will benefit in various fashions, 
according to their own conditions and intents, but every reader will 
benefit to some degree or another — and each reader will become 
reacquainted with those inner springs of vitality and well-being that 
are so important in human experience. 
(With a lilt:) End of Chapter One. 
(4:19.) Comments. 
It is because Ruburt now has more vitality that he sometimes 
becomes quite impatient with his progress. 
He feels more energetic, and of course wants to become much 
more active. (Long pause.) His food is doing him more and more 
good. He assimilates it far better, and this does allow the healing 
process to quicken. At the same time there is often that unevenness, 
as all portions of the body start up again, so to speak. The eyes today 
showed what I mean, as on occasion he could briefly read far better 
than he has so far, then seemingly go back to a previous level, and 
then back and forth between various stages. 
• D<± • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
The advice I recently gave must particularly be followed — so 
that he concentrates upon the joys that he possesses, keeps his goals 
in mind, and trusts the infinite intelligence within him to bring 
about the desired results. This frees his mind and allows his improvements to continue without interruption. 
I may or may not return, again according to those rhythms of 
which I speak — but know that I am present and approachable. My 
congratulations on the new edition of Seven. 
(Seth meant the Pocket Book edition of The Further Education of 
Oversoul Seven, which had arrived from Pren tice-Hall last nigh t — nine 
copies. 
( "Can I ask a question ? ") 
You may. 
("What do you think of the dream I had, about Leonard, Jane and me 
moving back to 458 West Water Street?") 
The interpretation you discussed is a good one. Leonard expressed 
his good health, and you are taking good health as a neighbor. 
(Very well put, Seth, I thought. "I've got another question.") 
Go Ahead. 
(Seth spoke while I tried to catch up on my writing. 
("I hadn't planned on asking about this this afternoon — but lately I've 
noticed that my closeup vision without glasses isn't as sharp as it used to be. 
I don't think the cause is physical. I think something's been bugging me 
lately, and it's coming out that way. It's nothing drastic, but enough to be 
bothersome at times. I haven't spent much time trying to figure it out — ") 
Give us a moment... It's your version of worrying that desired 
effects may not be brought into the present — that is, will not come 
into your close vision. When you feel that way, close your eyes, if only 
for a moment, reassure yourself that you can trust your vision — 
mental and physical — and that indeed your goals ^ill be brought 
into clear focus. 
("Okay." 
("It's me, "Jane said as I wrote. 
("Thank you, Seth," I said at 4:32 p.m. His advice tuas as excellent as 
always. I felt relieved, and will try the technique. I plan to type it separa tely 
where I can keep it in view in my writing room. Maybe on the desk itself. I 
told Jane I though t the question had been triggered by the session material 
today, especially that concerning Leonard.) 
THE PURPOSE OF THIS BOOK 
• 11 • 
JANUARY 2 0 , 1 9 8 4 
4:33 P.M. FRIDAY 
(Jane called me last night with Carla's help. The night was very cold — 
it was still 6 below when I got up at 6:30 a.m., and only 12 above when I 
left for 330. More bitter weather is predicted for the weekend. 
(Jane went to hydro as usual this morning, but wasn't too happy about 
the system. While she was eating a good lunch I thought of telling her the 
typewriter repair service had called this morning, citing a bill for $90.00 
for the repair and a box of a dozen cartridges, but I forgot to mention it as 
we talked about other things. I'd also called our optometrist and asked his 
secretary to have him return my call so I could ask him a couple of technical questions about a note I'm writing for Session 901 for Dreams. Since I 
had to wait for his call — which never came — I couldn't leave the house 
to get Jane's typewriter. I want to try it out to make sure it's okay before I 
turn my own in for repair, which it needs. 
(3:00. Jane began reading yesterday's session, getting through it much 
more slowly than she did yesterday. She finally finished it at 3:25. 
(At 3:43 she began reading the session for December 27, 1983, doing 
better than she had earlier. She was interrupted by people taking her 
vitals — temperature 98.3 — and finished the session finally at 4:20, 
after resting from reading several times. 
(Once again Jane talked about "watching my impatient moods." She 
really wants improvemen ts to lake place much more quickly than they are — 
really fast. I said I thought that maybe her impatience was meant to serve as 
an impetus to her healing speed. "At least it shows your body you want to do 
something, "I said. "What if you had no impatience or impetus ?" 
(She agreed, of course, and said she wanted a short session.) 
Now: I bid you another most fond good afternoon — 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
— and I am announcing myself again to quicken those conditions that accelerate the healing processes. 
You are correct about Ruburt's impatiences: He is to use it 
(underlined) as a tool, however, and not let it use him. That is, the 
impatience is indeed meant as an impetus, as a stimulus to further 
activity and motion — so he must think of that impatience as a 
friend, not as an adversary. 
The remaining bedsores will be healing themselves at an even 
quicker rate, since he is now assimilating protein so much better 
• D<± • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
than he used to. His mental exercises involving the inner "darning" 
(which Jane had told me about earlier this afternoon) of the sores with 
new tissue works well. Let it be done in a playful manner, however. 
I may or may not return, again according to those rhythms of 
which I speak, but know I am present and approachable. 
("Thank you." 
(4:38 P.M. Jane said both her hands are still improving, and they 
seemed so to me as I massaged them with Oil of Olay after I9d turned her on 
her left side. She ate well after Fd had a nap, as usual, and read the prayer 
with me at 7:05. Sleep well, Jane. I love you.) 
JANUARY 21,1984 
4:11 RM. SATURDAY 
(Last night had been very cold — it was still 5 below when 1 got up at 
6:30 A.M. After breakfast I ran the car to do several errands, getting the 
budget bills ready to mail, and so forth. Monday I pick up Jane's typewriter. 
(Jane told me that she'd had her catheter changed at 11:30 this morning, and had just finished having her dressings done before I arrived. She 
ate a good lunch. While she ate I described my reactions to and thoughts 
about Quest for Fire, a well-known movie of a couple of years ago that Fd 
seen part of on television's Showtime channel while eating supper last 
night. 
(I said I ivas most curious that Seth comment, since what the movie 
shoived was so at odds with his material on early man in Dreams. I 
expected there to be a great difference, but watching our early history as 
shown in the movie made life seem impossibly grim 80,000 years ago. I 
didn't see how our ancestors had survived, were the movie accurate. It had 
to be wrong — for all it depicted was savagery, on the parts of animals, 
apes, dogs, man, cannibals, and so forth. "If anyone lived to be even 20 
years old under those circumstances," I told Jane, "it would have been a 
miracle." There was no compassion, no intuition; little understanding 
revealed by the characters in the movie other than the emotions of bloodlust, 
survival of the fittest, and selfishness. It certainly offered no insights into 
hotv the human young were cared for over the long period necessary while 
they simply grew. 
(On my way to 330 Georgia called me in to her room and said she's to 
have some sort of back surgery next Monday or Tuesday. She's also being 
THE PURPOSE OF THIS BOOK 
• 11 • 
moved to the first floor — Surgical 1.1 have a lay unicorn I'll be giving her 
tomorrow, along with a verse Jane wrote. Both are clever and creative. Here 
is Jane's verse: 
The unicorn said, 
"Oh, pray take me 
to see my good friend, 
Georgia Cecce. 
Oh, Til jog and jig wi th glee 
for one smile from my friend, 
Georgia Cecce. 
My magic powers will set her free, 
my good friend, 
Georgia Cecce." 
(3:18. Jane began reading yesterday's session, but had hard going at 
first. She did a little better as I worked on mail, then quite good as she read 
the last page. "My eyes started coming in better," she said at 3:22. 
(3:29. She started the session for December 28, 1983 going sloivly 
again. She gave up on it at 3:40 for a cigarette. Then minutes later Carla 
came in to lake her temperature — 98.5. "Almost perfect," I said, joking. 
(3:55. Shawn look Jane's blood pressure and pulse, then my ivife went 
back to reading the session, doing a little better. Jane announced she was 
ready for the session at 4:10. She'd already told me she thought Seth would 
comment on the movie.) 
Now I bid you another fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
The picture of man, animals, and nature depicted in the movie 
of which you were speaking is the only possible portrayal of reality 
that could be logically shown, considering the beliefs upon which 
the premise rests. 
The environment, man, and the animals were all characterized 
as ferocious, hostile to each other, each one determined to attain 
survival at the expense of the other. Man could not have existed 
under the conditions fostered in the moving picture — nor for that 
matter could any of the animals. Despite any other theories to the 
• D<± • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
contrary, the world, all of its physical aspects, and all of its creatures, 
depends upon an inborn cooperation. The species do not compete 
with each other over a given territory, no matter how frequently that 
appears to be the case. (Longpause.) Period. 
Science has promoted the idea that hostility is a constant 
attribute of nature and all of its parts, while it sees the cooperating 
characteristics of nature as rather infrequent or extraordinary — 
but certainly outside of the norm (wryly amused). 
Even biologically on the most microscopic of levels, there is a 
vast inbred network of cooperating activity, and these unite the 
animal and mineral kingdoms with all the other aspects of earthly 
existence. Each organism has a purpose, and it is to fulfill its own 
capabilities in such a way that it benefits all other organisms. 
(4:23.) Each organism is therefore helped in its development by 
each and every other organism, and the smooth operation of one 
contributes to the integrity of all. Men did not begin hunting animals until certain groups of animals needed a way to control their 
own population. As I have said before, men and animals learned 
from each other. They were immediate allies, not enemies. 
Men also domesticated animals almost from the very first, so that 
men and animals both did each other a service — they worked 
together. The stability of planetary life depended above all upon this 
basic cooperation, in which all species pulled together. 
Man's brain was always the size that it is now — 
(4:28. A nurse came in to give Jane eyedrops. Afterward I read Jane what 
she'd given on the session. I mentioned that men and animals must have 
been cooperating even while still largely in the dream state. Resume at 4:37.) 
— and the animals existed in the forms by which you know them 
today. No animal — or virus — is truly extinct. All exist (longpause) in 
an inner webwork, and are held in the memory of an overall earthly 
knowledge — one that is biological, so that each smallest microbe 
has within it the imprinted biological messages that form each and 
every other microbe. The existence of one presupposes the existence 
of all, and the existence of all is inherent in the existence of one. 
I may or may not return, again according to those rhythms of 
which I speak. 
("Do you want to say a word about how Ruburt is doing?") 
THE PURPOSE OF THIS BOOK 
• 11 • 
Ruburt continues his improvements, and overall his strength 
grows daily. Certain conditions are happening within the body that 
will very soon now bring about very noticeable actual physical 
improvements in motion and overall coordination. 
(4:43 P.M. "It's me, " Jane said after a pause. She'd done well I was 
particularly glad to get Seth's encouraging words about her own condition, 
for she's still impatient for more improvements to take place. 
(With Carla's help, Jane called me at 9:47 P.M., just as I was finishing 
typing this session. I told her the temperature was already down to zero. 
Sleep warm and cozy, Jane.) 
JANUARY 22,1984 
4:07 RM. SUNDAY 
(The temperature was 5 below when I got up at 6:30, but it was up to 
15 when I left for 330 at 12:30. On the way to Jane's room, I stopped in 
Surgical 1 to give Georgia the unicorn we'd bought for her yesterday, and 
the poem Jane had written, which I'd transcribed onto the card we'd also 
bought. Georgia is to be operated on next Tuesday. 
(In Georgia's room, I met a nurse who used to take care of fane. She'd 
had the same operation, a myelogram, that Georgia is to get for a herniated 
disc. She gave Georgia plenty of negative suggestions while I was there: 
"You don't get over something like that very quickly," etc. Later this same 
nurse dropped in to say hello to Jane. "I sure hope I don 'I get her to take care 
of me, "Jane said after she'd left. "I want to get out of here." 
(Jane ate a good lunch. I told her about my very vivid and colorful 
dream of last night. She and I had been walking — hiking — along the 
banks of the Susquehanna River toward Sayre. We wore very bright and colorful clothing. The day was a beautiful balmy summer one. There were 
friends with us, and they offered us rides to our destination. We refused. 
Jane especially insisted on walking along the riverbanks. Her strides were 
perfectly normal and agile; she was in excellent health. 
(I also told Jane that beside the dream I'd like Seth to comment on the 
fact that I'd awakened this morning with Maude Cardwell on my mind, 
including the letter I'd written her a couple of tveeks ago. I'd almost forgotten about it. I wanted Seth to comment on Maude's reaction to the letter. I 
told Jane that I ivanted her to know the question in case we heard from 
• D<± • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
Maude this week, say. I figured there was a reason I was thinking about her 
this morning so definitely. Jane agreed that we might hear soon. 
(2:38.Janeput on lipstick, then looked at herself in the mirror — briefly. 
(3:00. She began reading yesterday's session, not too easily — then 
quit at 3:20 for a cigarette. I worked on mail. I also gave myself the suggestions Seth had outlined in the session for January 19, concerning my eyes 
when they aren 't seeing as sharply as I know they can. It helped. I'd also 
used the suggestion a couple of times this morning, with good results. It's a 
matter of worrying. I need to use the suggestion for a few days in order to 
give my creative self time to put it into effect; that's the way suggestion usually works with me. 
(3:39. Jane did much better now when she went back to reading the session. Carla took her temperature at 3:45 — 98.1. 
(Jane said she'd have the session early, so I could watch the Super Bowl, 
which was to begin at 4:30, but I said it didn't matter all that much. I'd be 
sitting in my chair and taking a nap during part of the game anyhow.) 
Now: I bid you another fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
I am again announcing myself to quicken those coordinates that 
so favor the healing processes. 
Once more, it is extremely important that Ruburt keep his mind 
on his goals, and not burden his conscious mind by trying to figure 
out circumstances and conditions that are best handled by the infinite intelligence that is within his own subconscious mind. The way 
and the means will be taken care of. They will indeed appear almost 
effortlessly — but he must let the burden of worry go. 
(Longpause.) Give us a moment... Maude was pleased and also 
astonished by your letter. She did not realize your circumstances — 
the medical expenses, or their extent. She is a great organizer, and is 
at work at several plans. 
It is, again, a good idea to review those portions of our sessions 
devoted to Ruburt's condition. 
Now I may or may not return, according to those rhythms of 
which I speak — but know that I am present and approachable. 
("What did you think of my dream about him last night?") 
The dream accentuated Ruburt's determination to achieve normal 
motion, and his insistence in the dream that he depend upon his own 
mobility, rather than, say, a vehicle or conveyance. It also represented 
THE PURPOSE OF THIS BOOK 
• 11 • 
your joint determination to travel together, so that even friends could 
not deter you, or change your way. 
("It's me. Thai's it." 
("Thank you." 
(4:14 P.M. I read the session to Jane. "That ought to make you feel 
better, especially that part about the dream," I said. Jane agreed that she'd 
been stewing about getting better, getting out of the hospital, even more 
lately than I'd thought she was. She even wondered "if they have any kind 
of wheelchair I could use to get around in .. . "I said I doubled if she could 
fit in any kind of chair until her doubled-up right leg began to open up 
more. But the important thing is that that desire is now present, and will 
certainly bear results — good ones. She's notv expressing serious desires 
about mobility that I can't remember her voicing for many years. The 
changes are in the works, and Seth has given many encouraging bits of 
information that they are having, and will have, an effect. 
(To help reinforce positive attitudes about the great days of change that 
are coming, I read aloud to Jane the personal parts of the sessions from January 13 to da te. They helped her considerably, reminding her of some poin ts 
she'd temporarily forgotten. It's easy to let a good point slip away as the sessions pile up day after day — but those bits of information can always be 
retrieved through review. We're doing belter at that than ever before.) 
JANUARY 23,1984 
4:24 RM. MONDAY 
(Our dear friend, Frank Longwell, who has been a great help to us for 
many years, visited while I had lunch today; he's made his first sale of a 
hearing aid. We wish him well. The day was much warmer — 25 
degrees — when I left for 330. I turned Jane on her back right away. She 
said that after I'd left last night two nurses had taken care of her, and that 
while they were doing so, they unloaded numerous negative suggestions 
about many things. Jane didn't say anything. Then when Steve and Tracy 
visited shortly afterward, they too had many negative things to say about 
many things — until finally Jane told Steve to quit dumping on her. Steve 
was also talking about the phases of the moon having influence on his 
behavior and actions, Jane said she didn't believe in that. He apologized. 
(I described an excellent dream I'd had last night. Once again in brilliant color — one of those you keep returning to. Jane and I had moved 
• D<± • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
back to 458 W. Water Street, only now the house was much bigger than it 
really is, had many more apartments in it — they were all in good shape, 
with numerous stairways connecting them on a split-level layout They 
weren 'I closed off from each other as apartments usually are, so that the 
numerous tenants could have free in terchange with each other if they chose 
to. But when I wanted to be by myself to paint, I had a corner studio I could 
retire to where I could work in privacy — a very nice room. Jane was very 
active and healthy, ivalking about normally. In the dream I was involved 
with painting, but not writing. 
(3:16. Jane started reading yesterday's session, and did fairly well, 
better than yesterday, I thought. I did mail. She began to have trouble getting through the session, but finished by 3:30, doing better towards the end. 
(3:55. I began questioning Jane about her religious training in 
Catholic grade school. I'd started roughing out a note this morning having 
to do with Seth's statement in a session for Chapter 5 of Dreams. In it he'd 
referred to early humans living for several centuries — the only time he's 
ever made such a reference. I planned to look up the ages of some Biblical 
pa triarchs, and wan ted to know what Jane migh t have been taught about 
such people, and their ages. 
(Carla interrupted our conversation to check Jane's vitals — temperature 98.4. During our talk I noticed that it didn 'I take my wife long to begin 
reacting emotionally to my questions, which I thought were innocent 
enough — but it was apparent that the subject matter of our conversation 
had an emotional charge for her. One of them, I thought, probably related to 
her symptoms if one traced it back. In fact, I was sure of it. However, after 
she realized what she was doing, Jane seemed to take my questions in stride, 
and even volunteered a lot of information I hadn't asked for. 
(4:20. Jane asked me to rub a certain spot on her left temple. Finally, 
when I withdrew my finger, she suddenly cried out and her head dipped 
quickly to the right. Some kind of muscular release had taken place, quite 
unexpected. She cried out several times and appeared momentarily dazed. 
She asked me to rub the equivalent spot on her right temple, but before we got 
any results a nurse came in to say, "I'm making my 4 o'clock check a little 
late. Do you want anything?" 
("And I got hot too, after that, "Jane said, referring to her forehead reaction, This made me think that the warmth she felt was a sign of bodily healing, such as Seth had saicl recently was associated with warmth. 
THE PURPOSE OF THIS BOOK 
• 11 • 
(After our talk about religious questions, I wrote a short note quoting 
Jane — one that I may use in the note for Dreams — and got her okay 
on it.) 
Now: I bid you another fond good afternoon. 
("Afternoon, Seth.") 
In those early days men and women did live to ages that would 
amaze you today — many living to be several hundred years old. 
This was indeed due to the fact that (pause) their knowledge was 
desperately needed, and their experience. They were held in veneration, and they cast their knowledge into songs and stories that were 
memorized throughout the years. 
Beside this, however, their energy was utilized in a different fashion than yours is. They alternated between the waking and dream 
states (longpause), and while asleep they did not age as quickly. Their 
bodily processes slowed. Although this was true, their dreaming 
mental processes did not slow down. There was a much greater communication in the dream state, so that some lessons were taught 
during dreams, while others were taught in the waking condition. 
There was a greater and greater body of knowledge to be transmitted as physical existence continued, for they did not transmit private knowledge only, but the entire body of knowledge that 
belonged to the group or tribe as a whole. 
(Pause at 4:33.) Now: your dream represented the larger rooms 
of beliefs into which you are emerging. The many people, and connecting rooms, represented the new structure of vaster beliefs that 
are all interconnected while you are still, however, concentrating 
upon the private creative self, and from that viewpoint viewing the 
world — hence your private corner in which you painted, as from 
that corner of private creativity you viewed the large interacting 
structure of new beliefs. 
Now I may or may not return, but know that I am present and 
approachable, and that I have again quickened those healing 
processes that are leading toward Ruburt's full recovery. 
("What was that reaction he had when I rubbed his left templeV9) 
It was an excellent reaction. He knew instinctively what pressure 
points he wanted you to touch. These are important points in the 
body that accentuate energy, but can also absorb stress. Touching 
• D<± • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
them as you did releases the stress — and Ruburt felt lighter-headed 
in response. Such events also release other portions of the body as 
the effect reverberates, so to speak. 
(4:40 P.M. I thanked Seth for appearing. Jane had some ginger ale 
before I turned her on her side. I didn 't note it in my dream account earlier 
here, bu t I'd described to Jane how I'd asked whoever owned 458 W. Water 
Street these days how much our rent would be. I did this several times, but 
received no answer. I expected it to be good, and was afraid it would be high. 
Seth hadn't commented, and I didn't ask him.) 
JANUARY 24,1984 
4:27 P.M. TUESDAY 
(The day was amazingly warm — over 43 — as I drove to 330 after 
leaving my own typewriter at the^ service franchise. /Is she ate lunch I told 
Jane about my very vivid and colorful dream of last night. I felt it was 
significant 
(First, I was hiking with her father Del along mountain trails in very 
deep snow. There were many other people about; it wasn't an isolated-type 
setting. Up and down and around we went Then Del left me for some 
reason, and alone I tried to continue — but wound up clinging motionless 
to a very steep slope lest I slide tvay down into a deep ravine that would be 
very difficult to get out of Then Del returned; he wore clean, modern, tailored hiking clothes, a wool jacket and a fedora with a feather in it — much 
sharper than he dresses in real life. He also looked much younger and more 
self-possessed than I'd ever seen him be. 
(Then, I was in a lodge on the mountainside. Some of the walls were of 
floor-to-ceiling glass. There were many people about, sitting and eating at 
small round tables with white cloths. The setting was very posh. I was with 
Jean Longwell, the daughter of our friend Frank. We got up and began 
dancing, holding each other very close. I felt deep affection for Jean, a 
strange and surprising longing mixed with a strong sexual awareness of 
her attractiveness. I also knew she felt the same way about me. We talked. /Is 
we did my eyes were so close to her face that I could see the liny pores in the 
skin below her eyes — very fine and smooth. The dream ended here, or 
faded into other levels. 
(This dream stayed with me the whole day, so strong was its impact 
upon me. I kept feeling that strange affection for Jean, mixed with a regret 
THE PURPOSE OF THIS BOOK 
• 11 • 
of some kind that nothing could really transpire between us — because of 
age and other factors. I told Jane I also felt that Jean was somehow dissatisfied in life, perhaps confused, perhaps caught between her artistic leanings 
and her upbringing to lead the more conventional life — working at the 
hospital, and so forth. I sensed, I think, that she wasn't too sure about her 
move to the city in North Carolina — Raleigh ? — that she planned with 
her boyfriend. Yesterday Frank had told me that it wouldn't be as easy to see 
Jean now tha t it was a 15-hour drive instead of jus t ninning down to 
Washington DC. 
(3:00. Jane began reading yesterday's session, but couldn't do it. She 
quit after a few minutes while I worked on mail. She tried again at 3:20 
and did much better. I told her Fve tried Seth's suggestions about enhancing my close-up vision, given in a recent session, and that they've worked 
very well. Jane finished the session at 3:35. At 3:40 she started reading the 
session for October 9, 1983, but didn't do quite as well — see the hospital 
and session chronology in my opening notes for the session of January 6, 
1984. She laid the session aside again for a cigarette, then went back to it 
at 3:58. Finally she just gave up on it, and eventually decided to have a 
short session, since it was getting late.) 
Now: I bid you another fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
Your dream was triggered specifically by Frank's visit (yesterday 
noon), and his discussion about his daughter, Jean. 
That led you, just below normal consciousness, to consider the relationship between father and daughter, and then to think of Ruburt's 
father, Del. He appeared younger and more vital than you had ever 
known him — indeed, transformed in a fashion. He was redeemed 
in your mind, and appeared as his ideal self. In that capacity he 
helped lead you along safe paths, out of danger. 
This also signified your knowledge on other levels that Ruburt 
was becoming free of any negative beliefs that were the result of his 
relationship with his father. 
Jean Longwell then represented Frank's feelings toward his 
daughter, and in a fashion you felt those as your own — a mixture of 
paternal love, sexuality, and sympathy. Those feelings were also representative of Del's redeemed love for liis daughter — for Ruburt. 
The dream signified your knowledge that Ruburt was being 
cleared of negative connotations in relationship to his father. On the 
• D<± • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
other hand, the young Del was also a symbol for your own inner self, 
acting as a guide and companion. 
This session, again, activates those coordinates that quicken bodily 
healing. Have Ruburt remind himself again that it is safe to let go, 
and trust his own spontaneous rhythms, his own motion. 
I may or may not return, but know that I am present and 
approachable. 
(4:38 P.M. I read the session to Jane. "I don 't know ivhy," she said, "but 
as you read that I got the feeling that my father is looking out for me . . . "I 
said that was certainly implied in the session, and that I'd wondered about it 
as Seth spoke. I also reminded her that in the October session I'd written in my 
notes about redemption. This is a subject Ifeel strongly about, yet we seldom 
if ever mention the word. I've also dealt with its implications in Dreams. 
(We hadn't been interrupted during the session. In fact, we finally realized that no one had checked Jane's vitals or emptied her Foley all afternoon. 
A nurse showed up at 4:47 and did the vitals — temperature 98.3, blood 
pressure excellent. 
(As we talked, something triggered Jane's memory of a time in her teens 
when she'd hiked all the way out to the garage where her grandfather had 
worked in Saratoga Springs — "way across town." She thought she could 
have been in the eighth grade. Jane remembered looking down in to a puddle 
and composing a poem. She even remembered at least some of it: 
I looked in the puddle 
and what should I see 
but the stars in 
the heavens looking back at me. . . 
(Strange: Later in the afternoon I finally made an important connection about the unexpected value of dreams. I told Jane that I suddenly 
understood that in the dream I'd experienced paternal feelings — genuine 
ones — that I'd never known in conscious life, or had access to. It followed 
that in the dream state, then, I'd actually enlarged upon my experience in 
this life, and in a most meaningful and strong way, Even as I unite this 
account at 9:30 P.M. I still feel the impact of those feelings. 
(I might as well add that in Chapter 5 of Dreams I deal with a couple 
of my intense experiences with the "light of the universe" back in 1980. 
Frank had been involved in one of those, too, in the dream state, and Seth 
THE PURPOSE OF THIS BOOK 
• 11 • 
had explained how Fd picked up his concerns about age and sexuality and 
worth, and so forth. So last night's dream also involved elements based 
upon data Fd picked up from Frank. Evidently our psychic communication 
works very well. . .) 
JANUARY 25,1984 
4:09 RM. WEDNESDAY 
(Once again the day was quite warm — 40 degrees by the time I left for 
330. Jane was on her back. She'd just had her dressings changed before I got 
there. The staff had been very busy, and so had hydro. 
(While she ate I told her Fd called our lawyer this morning. No news 
about Blue Cross — but he had said that we had no worries about gift taxes 
should anyone contribute to the fund Maude Cardwell is presumably organizing for us. There's a $10,000 starting point before taxes take effect. 
(I also told Jane about the entertaining time Fd had this morning 
checking Biblical genealogies, preparatory to the note I want to write for 
Chapter 5 of Dreams. Seth's elders would have lived long before those in the 
Bible — or would they? For Adam was the first man, at least according to 
the Bible. It would depend upon what terms one chose within which to view 
the situation. 
(Jane ate a good lunch. TV was on, advertisements for movies, and I 
asked her why our literature is made up of the bad in life — murder, 
mayhem, thievery, bribery, robbery, and so forth. I said our craving for such 
"entertainment" must reflect our basic social beliefs beneath our veneer of 
respectability — the conscious, negative fears of the unknown, 
meaning 
that we've created such a division in ourselves by shutting out our conscious 
awareness of our own true selves. We've now reached the point where our 
subjective lives are largely hidden, but continuously striving to show themselves against all pressures . . . 
(3:00. Jane began reading yesterday's session — and doing much 
better than she had yesterday. She finished at 3:08 — quickly — and said 
that part of the time her vision was very clear. She had a smoke and I 
worked on mail while waiting to see if she wan ted to do any more reading. 
(3:18. She began the session for January 13, and did even better — 
very fast. 
(Somewhere in here I'd gotten her lipstick for her, and after applying it 
she had looked in the mirror — again briefly. But she did it. 
• D<± • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
(4:00. Carla and Shannon took her vitals — temperature 98.3. Jane 
said she wanted to have a session. I mentioned to her my idea that Seth's 
elders must predate by far the elders of the Bible, and she agreed.) 
Now — I bid you another fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
Once again, I quicken those coordinates that are so important in 
the healing processes. 
There was additional improvement in Ruburt's eyes and vision, 
and those improvements specifically are connected with freer 
motions of the head and arm areas — the hands being included. 
Many preparations are being made for motions that m^ be 
needed in the near future, to aid in balance and general locomotion. 
(Longpause.) The Bible is a conglomeration of parables and stories, intermixed with some unclear memories of much earlier times. 
The bible that you recognize — or that is recognized — is not the 
first, however, but was compiled from several earlier ones as man 
tried to look back, so to speak, and recount his past and predict his 
future. 
Such bibles existed, not written down but carried orally, as mentioned some time ago, by the Speakers. It was only much later that 
this information was written down, and by then, of course, much had 
been forgotten. This is apart from the fact of tampering, or downright misinformation (longpause) as various factions used the material for their own ends. 
(Long pause at 4:16.) You mentioned the paternal feelings of 
your dream. They allowed you to expand your experience while in 
the dream state. This also presents you with an example of the ways 
in which early man expanded his own knowledge and experience in 
the dream state. In the same way, as mentioned in Dreams, man also 
had dream images of actual geographical locations to which he had 
not physically traveled. 
Now I may or may not return, according to those rhythms of 
which I speak — but know that I am present and approachable. 
("Yes. Thank you.99 
(4:19 P.M. Neither of us had particularly though t tha t my dream-pa ternal feelings represented an analogy with the way early man had expanded 
his own knowledge ivhile in the dream state — but we saw the connection 
as soon as Seth men tioned it. I read the session to Jane. 
THE PURPOSE OF THIS BOOK 
• 11 • 
(I thought, as soon as Seth had mentioned it, that the data regarding 
the Speakers and oral traditions went way back to when Jane produced Seth 
Speaks in 1970-71. [See Session 558for November5, 1970, in the appendix of Seth Speaks7 
(Jane said that as I read to her, she picked up from Seth information 
that in those old days people most often insisted upon returning to the sites 
of their destroyed or damaged cities and towns and farms, even though such 
events had wiped those places out more than once. It was as though the 
people were psychically and emotionally drawn back to such places for reasons that made no sense intellectually. We talked about the well-known 
"tells" in Israel, for example. 
(A no te: I s till feel the effects of my dream of two nights ago, involving 
Del and Jean Longwell.) 
CHAPTER 2 
BIOLOGICALLY VALID THOUGHTS, 
ATTITUDES, AND BELIEFS 
JANUARY 26,1984 
4:08 P.M. THURSDAY 
\ / rmT^he temperature was about 33 degrees as I left for 330. Jane had the 
A window of her room wide open, and the place was still hot. I began 
peeling off clothes layer by layer. I told her about my dream of last night: Fd 
been in my writing room and I heard Jim Baker, our optometrist, in my 
studio. Fie was talking and using an occasional cuss word in a rather 
humorous way. I heard his voice clearly. I knew that Jane was in the house 
somewhere, that she was walking perfectly all right, and that Jim had come 
to see her, not me. I wasn't concerned or jealous. 
(As we talked before lunch came, Jane shed a few tears. She wanted to 
get up and get out of bed and start walking — without wailing. I told her 
of the insight that came to me as she talked. It ivas that the body healed itself 
at a rate prescribed by its circumstances — that actually it could heal itself 
very rapidly if it was unimpeded. Thus, being in a hospital with all the negative suggestions could operate telepalhically as well as overtly to slow down 
healing. The insight, which is hardly original, popped into my mind when 
I asked Jane why the healing was taking so long, in response to something 
she said. I hoped Seth ivould comment. 
(After eating an excellent lunch, Jane told me of her own long and complicated dream of last night. She was with Ronald Reagan and one of his 
BIOLOGICALLY VALID THOUGHTS 
• 101 • 
daughters. She talked him out of his nuclear-arms policies, and out of the 
devil — and evil — idea. She was very pleased in the dream at her success. 
She also said there was more she couldn't remember. 
(Then we had a discussion about some articles I've just read in the 
latest issue of Free Inquiry, a magazine whose writers express a deep skepticism about any thing having to do with the paranormal. 
(3:30. Dana took Jane's temperature — 98.6 — perfect. Jane had just 
started reading the session for yesterday. She resumed, doing pretty well, at 
3:40.1 did mail. 
(3:58.1 rubbed Jane's right temple at her request, and got a good reaction when I pulled my finger away finally: "Ifeel so light — it's great. I can 
even feel it in the crook of my elbow — there must be a nerve there." She said 
she wanted to have a session.) 
Now: I bid you another fond good afternoon — 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
— and we will begin Chapter 2, to be titled: "Biologically Valid 
Thoughts, Attitudes, and Beliefs." 
(Longpause.) When you are born you possess a group of attitudes 
toward yourself and toward life. These allow you to grow with the 
greatest possible impetus into childhood. They are also important in 
every period of your life. You can see (longpause) the results in life all 
about you, though in animals or plants these are experienced as a 
matter of feelings rather than, say, as thoughts or attitudes. 
It may sound very simplistic to tell you that you must have sunny 
thoughts as well as rays of the physical sun in order to be healthy — 
but sunny thoughts are as biologically necessary to your well-being as 
are the rays of the sim that shines in the sky. Even as infants, then, 
you are predisposed naturally toward certain feelings, thoughts 
and attitudes that are meant to insure your healthy survival and 
emergence into adulthood. These are actually composed of inbred 
psychological information as necessary and vital to your life as the 
data transmitted by your genes and chromosomes. Indeed, these 
inbred, inner psychological predispositions are all-important if the 
information carried by your genes and chromosomes is to be faithfully followed. 
(4:17.) It is difficult to translate such (pause) biological and psychological material into the words of any language, even though 
these inbred psychological prerequisites form a kind of language of 
/A 
• 6 6 - 
; 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
their own. It is a language that promotes growth, e x u b e r a n c e and 
fulfillment, and stimulates the entire organism of the body — slg" 
naling the proper responses that are required for health and growth. 
Later we will discuss contrary feelings, thoughts, and emotions. I 
want to substitute beliefs for emotions — 
("Yes.") 
— that gready curtail the natural progression of health and vitality. Here, however, we will deal primarily with those inner predispositions that encourage life and vitality. 
(4:24.) Now: Comments. 
Ruburt has been feeling new, strong surges of desire — desire 
for normal health, normal motion, energy, and strength. Those feelings are also meant to be used as impetuses to lead him in the proper 
directions, so that indeed those desires are fulfilled. He must understand them as such. By themselves they can act to unlock additional 
energy, vitality, and quicken his sense of purpose. . 
Again, have him almost as nonchalantly as possible imagine himself behaving as normally as possible in the future. Now this is to be 
a new future, brought on as the result of healthier, wiser beliefs and 
attitudes. The "future" that he feared, he must understand, no 
longer exists — for it was composed of beliefs he no longer holds. 
(Long pause at 4:29, eyes half closed. I9d say the paragraph just above 
is extremely important.) 
The first chapter of the book can be called, quite simply: "The 
Purpose of This Book, and Some Important Comments About Exuberance and Health." 
Now I may or may not return, again according to those rhythms 
of which I speak, but know that I am present and approachable. 
I wanted to give you book material, and that is why I did not comment upon your dreams — 
("Well, you can say something about the dreams if you want to. . . 
How about Jane's dream V') 
Give us a moment... In Ruburt's dream, he is completely reeducating the part of himself that he once considered an authority. 
He convinced that portion that the old beliefs about good and evil, 
self-destruction, and the existence of the Catholic devil, were not 
valid. In the dream he triumphs over those beliefs. 
BIOLOGICALLY VALID THOUGHTS 
• 101 • 
Your dream represents Ruburt's more healthy attitude toward 
his eyes and their vision. It also represents his growing faith in his 
own psychic vision, and hence his return to his own natural rhythms 
and motion. 
("Thank you." 
(4:3 7 P.M. "Well, I'm glad I asked about those dreams," I said. Both of 
them were very good, and should reinforce Jane's progress and attitudes. 
("Iknew he was going to do something on the book,"Jane said. "I have 
the feeling that the book's going to be The Way Toward Health," she said. 
(I told Jane that Seth's opening line for Chapter 2, about possessing a 
group of attitudes toward oneself and toward life, at birth, runs directly 
counter to establishment theory that the newborn is like a blank slate, to be 
imprinted through leaching and experience. This would be especially true of 
behaviorism. She laughed.) 
JANUARY 27,1984 
4:08 P.M. FRIDAY 
(Today was even warmer than it has been — an incredible 45 degrees 
when I backed the car out of the garage. Wouldn 'I you know it — the spring 
mechanism that governs the travel of the garage door broke as I was lowering the door, so that I couldn't close it all the way. So when I got to 330 one 
of my first acts was to call Overhead Door and ask them to have someone 
check the garage door this afternoon, if possible. I gave directions and asked 
that a bill be sent to me. I hoped to get service today, it being Friday. 
(Jane had an excellent lunch. While she ate I told her several times that 
I had a feeling of anticipation, as though I had something I wanted to tell 
her, but couldn't recall it. Only I hadn't forgotten anything. At times the 
feeling was rather strong. 
(We watched In Search Of from 2:30 to 3:00, and the program 
reminded me of a number of questions I'd thought of at various times. The 
program dealt with the atom-bombing of Hiroshima, Japan, and the aftereffects, such as cancer. My questions had to do with the consciousness that 
must reside within, or make up, radiation, and why that type of consciousness was so virulent that we humans couldn't tolerate it. Yet we'd created it, 
in ordinary terms. The same with a disease like cancer, I told Jane. Why did 
we create it when toe couldn't tolerate many forms of it? 
• D<± • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
(I went on to tell her of my idea that arthritis, for example, bridged all 
istorical gaps and cultures, and that its origin — I think — lay in the 
idividuaVs reaction to fear of motion, for a multitude of reasons. Jane 
>emed a little surprised at this idea. 1 said Fd felt it to be true for some time, 
leaning years. 
(I added that I hoped Seth would eventually discuss such questions in 
is book. 
(3:00. Jane began reading yesterday's session — it wasn't her best 
fort by any means, but she managed to get through it with a little help 
vm me. She finished at 3:20, doing better at the end. I worked with mail. 
(Jane told me she ivas a little surprised that Maude Cardwell hadn't 
nswered my letter of a couple of weeks ago by now — but I said I thought 
lings were proceeding as all of us wanted them to, really. After all, I hadn't 
iven Maude our phone number — though I plan to — and we've mainlined a distance from her and others who have offered help. If we behave 
lat way, we can hardly expect others to act differently toward us. 
(By 3:55 Carla had taken Jane's temperature — 98 — and Shawn 
er blood pressure and pulse. At this relatively early hour, Lynn came in to 
ive Jane her eyedrops after which my wife said she tuas ready for a session.) 
Now: I bid you another fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
Dictation. These inborn leanings or attitudes can roughly be 
anslated as follows. 
1.1 am an excellent creatvire, a valuable part of the universe in 
hich I exist. 
2. My existence enriches all other portions of life, even as my 
wn being is enhanced by the rest of creation. 
3. It is good, natural, and safe for me to grow and develop and use 
ly abilities, and by so doing I also enrich all other portions of life. 
Next: I am eternally couched and supported by the universe of 
hich I am a part, and I exist whether or not that existence is physially expressed. 
Next: By nature I am a good deserving creature, and all of life's 
lements and parts are also of good intent. 
And next: All of my imperfections, and all of the imperfections 
f other creatures, are redeemed in the greater scheme of the unisrse in which I have my being. 
BIOLOGICALLY VALID THOUGHTS 
• 101 • 
Those attitudes are inbred in the smallest microscopic portions 
of the body — a part of each atom and cell and organ, and they 
serve to trigger all of the body's responses that promote growth and 
fulfillment. Infants are not born with an inbred fear of their environment, or of other creatures. They are instead immersed in feelings of well-being, vitality, and exuberance. They take it for granted 
that their needs will be met, and that the universe is well-disposed 
toward them. They feel a part of their environment. 
(Long pause at 4:20.) They do not come into life with feelings of 
rage, or anger, and basically they do not experience doubts or fears. 
Birth is experienced in terms of self-discovery, and includes the sensation of selfhood gently rising and unfolding from the secret heart 
of the universe. 
(During the last paragraph the fire alarm bell began sounding by the 
elevator door outside Jane's room. The strange ringing was most distracting, and I thought it would never stop, yet Jane remained in trance, and 
continued dictation around a few pauses.) 
Many people believe that birth, to the contrary, is a time of 
trauma, or even of rage, as the infant leaves its mother's womb. Birth 
is life's most precious natural process. Even in births that are thought 
of (underlined) as not "normal," there is on the infant's part a sense 
of discovery and joy. 
We will have more to say about the process of birth later on in 
this book. For now, I simply want to make the point that in the most 
basic of terms the human birth is as orderly and spontaneous as the 
birth of any of nature's creatures — and a child opens its selfhood 
even as a flower opens its petals. 
The inborn leanings and attitudes that we have been discussing 
should ideally (underlined) remain with you for the rest of your life, 
leading you to express your abilities, and finding fulfillment as your 
knowledge expands through experience. The same feelings and 
beliefs should also ideally (underlined) help you die with a sense of 
safety, support and assvirance. While these inbred psychological supports never leave you entirely, they are often diminished by beliefs 
encountered later in life, that serve to undermine the individual's 
sense of safety and well-being. 
(Pause at 4:33.) Comments. 
• D<± • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
Again, I quicken those coordinates that benefit the healing 
processes. Have Ruburt read again the material pertaining to him in 
yesterday's session. 
Now I may or may not return, again according to those rhythms 
of which I speak — but know that I am present and approachable. 
("Can I ask a question ?") 
You may. 
("It's just about what we were talking about early today — the consciousness in radiation, that's so powerful to us — or in cancer — ") 
All of that material, and its like, will be covered in this book. 
Make a note, however, of such questions when they naturally occur. 
(aOkay. Thank you." 
(4:35 P.M.Jane had some ginger ale and a cigarette. "Well, he's going to 
cover those questions in the book," I told Jane — "about radiation, the consciousness involved with it, and With things like cancer. It ought to be fascinating, unique stuff. " And, I thought, I had to start a page of questions 
and keep it with each latest session so I didn't let them get away from us. 
(After supper I read to Jane the passages from the session of the day 
before that Seth had referred to. They're very good. 
(I also think it quite evident that Seth began to go into those attributes 
we're born with in light of my comments about current psychological dogma 
that the infant is born without any impetuses . . . 
(And when I got home tonight, my feeling of anticipation ivas borne 
out: there was a communication from Maude Cardwell. Also, the garage 
door had been fixed.) 
JANUARY 28,1984 
3:54 P.M. SATURDAY 
(The day was much cooler when I left for 330 — only 29 degrees. I look 
Maude Cardwell's letter to shoiv Jane. She'd gotten back from hydro pretty 
late. "You don't want to hear about all of that," she said when I asked her 
how come. "Talking about it makes me sound like I'm bitching all the time. 
It worked out all right." 
(Jane didn't eat much lunch — the cheeseburger was badly overcooked, 
and quite tough. Neither of us had dreams to report. I read her Maude's 
letter, and her article in Reality Change, saying we'd have to work out a 
response. We'll also have to figure out how to handle any money we receive, 
BIOLOGICALLY VALID THOUGHTS 
• 101 • 
until the hospital and insurance questions are resolved. I plan to call our 
lawyer Monday morning to ask for advice. I imagine I'll be opening a separate account at the bank for the fund checks. I also told Jane I'd like something from Seth that Maude can send to contributors. 
(Carla and Denise were through taking Jane's vitals — temperature 
97.6 — by 3:40. And Jane said she was ready for the session much earlier 
than usual.) 
Now — I bid you another fond good afternoon. 
(ttGood afternoon, Seth.") 
Dictation. (Pause.) All of this talk about exuberance, health and 
vitality may seem quite beside the point to many of you. (Long pause.) 
It may seem instead that the world is filled with unhappiness and 
disease. 
I admit that this certainly seems to be the case. It may also strike 
you, my readers, as quite shocking when I tell you that there is no 
such thing, basically, as disease. There are instead only processes. 
What you think of as disease — 
(3:56. There was a knock on the door. Someone darted into the room, 
left a pile of white underpads on the desk, and darted back out.) 
— is instead the result of an exaggeration or overextension of 
perfectly normal body processes. You are not attacked by viruses, for 
instance, for all kinds of viruses exist normally in the body. There are 
no killer (underlined) viruses, then, but viruses that go beyond their 
usual bounds. We will have more to say about svich issues later on in 
the book — for I hope to show you how certain feelings and beliefs 
do indeed promote health, while others promote an unfortunate 
extension or exaggeration of perfectly normal bodily processes, or 
viral activity. 
This means, of course, that you do not fall victim to a disease, or 
catch a virus, but that for one reason or another your own feelings, 
thoughts, and beliefs lead you to seek bouts of illness. Period. 
Certainly, such ideas will sound like medical heresy to many readers, but the sooner you begin to look at health and "disease" in these 
new terms, the healthier and happier you will become. (Longpause.) 
You are not one thing and illness another, for your thoughts and 
emotions are the triggers that lead to bouts of poor health. Once you 
know this, you can begin to take steps that will serve to promote exuberance and vitality instead of fear, doubts, and "disease." 
• D<± • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
(4:07.) You will discover that so-called diseases perform certain 
services. They fulfill purposes for you that you may believe you can 
achieve in no other way. The reasons for such illnesses are not deeply 
buried in the subconscious, as you may think. They are much closer 
to the conscious mind, and usually consist of a series of seemingly 
innocuous decisions that you have made through the years. Other 
illnesses, of course, may be caused by sudden decisions that are a 
response to a particular event in your life. 
(Long pause.) People have been taught that their bodies are a 
kind of battleground, and that they must be in a constant state of 
readiness lest they be attacked or invaded by alien germs or viruses 
or diseases that can strike without warning. 
Soon, we will begin to discuss other negative beliefs that cause 
poor health. For now, however, we will concentrate upon those 
inbred, positive attitudes, feelings, and beliefs that constantly improve 
our sense of well-being, strength, and fulfillment. 
Take a break and we will continue. 
(4:15. Jane said she thought that right away Seth was starting to 
answer my question of yesterday — not the portion about radiation and 
why that phenomenon is too strong for us to bear, but the part about the consciousness embodied in cancer, say, ivhich is also too much for us much of 
the time. I saw what she meant. 
(Resume at 4:26, with a touch of amusement:) 
Now: a letter. 
I wish to thank you for your help to Ruburt and Joseph, and in 
return I send you those blessings that are mine to give. We are 
presently working on a book to be called The Way Toward Health, and 
I hope the material in that book will benefit you in the most personal 
of terms, and allow you to experience the exuberance, joy, strength 
and good health that are your heritage. Though we have not met in 
physical terms, I am indeed aware of your presence, circumstances, 
and good intentions. 
On behalf of the three of us, again I send you our sincere thanks, 
and our heartiest salute. To be signed simply, "Seth." 
Now I may or may not return, according to those rhythms of 
which I speak — but know that I am present and approachable. 
I hope that my letter meets with your approval. 
BIOLOGICALLY VALID THOUGHTS 
• 101 • 
("Yes. Thank you," I said, although I was wondering if it was a little 
short.) 
It can be addressed to "Dear Friend/' 
("All right." 
(4:31 P.M. "Oh,"Jane exclaimed, "we did get the title of the book! He 
didn't say any thing about me today, but we did get something on the book." 
I read Seth 9s letter to her right away. 
(Then I also took down Jane's own letter to contributors, which was 
obviously triggered by Seth 's. She dictated this quite as easily as Seth had 
done his own. A few minutes later: 
Dear Friends: 
Thank you so much for helping us out at this time of our need. 
1 have to admit that I am touched and embarrassed, because Rob and 
I have always made it on our own until now. It's always been easier for me 
to give than to receive. Now I'm learning to receive graciously and thankfully — a lesson that I had to learn. Ill or not, I do still feel full of life, and 
I'm still kicking — at least symbolically! 
Many, many thanks. 
Love, Jane.) 
JANUARY 29,1984 
4:18 P.M. SUNDAY 
(I went shopping at the Acme after 1 left Jane last night, got home about 
8:30, and finished supper an hour la ter. I was typing the session at 10:00 
when she called with Carta's help. 
(This morning I wrote Maude Cardwell a short letter, promising more 
later, both from ourselves and via our lawyer. Tomorrow morning I check 
with him regarding tax matters and donations and what sort of bank 
account I should open for the hospital money. 
(Jane told me she'd had to have a new catheter inserted at 3:30 A.M. 
That part went okay, though she was quite uncomfortable by the time I got 
to 330 — generally uncomfortable, that is. She ate a good lunch, and I 
brought home scraps for our cats, Billy and Mitzi Jane mourns not being 
able to see those creatures. 
• D<± • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
(2:35. She applied lipstick and looked briefly in the mirror. I don't 
think she's missed a day since Seth suggested it. 
(2:40. Jane began reading yesterday's session, but found it hard going. 
She had some bladder spasms, and finally laid aside the session to have a 
cigarette while I worked on mail. She ivent back to the session at 2:56, doing 
a little better, and finished at 3:09. 
(3:20-3:55. Judy emptied Jane's Foley, or catheter bag, Dorothy took 
her blood pressure and pulse, and Carla her temperature — 98.2. I did 
some more mail until Jane said she was ready for a session. The hospital 
had been very quiet today, and we'd been left pretty much alone most of the 
time. Jane's Seth voice was a bit stronger than usual.) 
Now I bid you another fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
Dictation. (Longpause.) All elements of life are optimistic. 
The fetus, for example, is remarkably optimistic, carrying within 
itself the miniature pattern for an entire human adult, taking it for 
granted that conditions will be favorable enough so that the entire 
pattern of normal life will be fulfilled despite any impediments or 
adverse conditions. 
This expectation to grow and flourish is addressed within each 
atom, cell, and organ, and all of life's parts contain this optimistic 
expectation and are blessed with the promise that their abilities will 
grow to maturity. 
(Long pause.) Children spontaneously take it for granted that 
their acts will result in the most favorable circumstances, and that any 
given situation will have a favorable end result. These attitudes pervade in the animal kingdom also. They are embedded in the life of 
insects, and in fish and fowl. They are the directions that provide life 
with purpose, direction, and impetus. No organism automatically 
expects to find starvation or disappointment or detrimental conditions — yet even when such circumstances ai£ encountered, they in 
no way affect the magnificent optimism that is at the heart of life. 
(4:28.) Even when biological "failures" develop, as with stillborn 
infants, or malformed ones, the inner consciousness involved does 
not give up, and even though death results, the consciousness tries 
again under different conditions. In such cases death is not experienced by the organism as a failure, or as a biological mistake. It is 
BIOLOGICALLY VALID THOUGHTS 
• 101 • 
simply felt to be an experience, a discovery, that went so far and no 
further — but the events in no way impede the vitality and strength 
of the inner consciousness so involved. 
(Pause at 4:32.) Comments. 
Make sure, again, that you review portions of the sessions dealing 
with Ruburt's condition. Remind him to accept impatience as a 
friend, meant to lead him to the fulfillment of his desire. Once 
more, I activate those coordinates that so promote the healing 
processes. I may or may not return, according to those rhythms of 
which I speak — but know that I am present and approachable. 
("Okay." 
(4:35 RM. Jane's delivery had been good, and I told her the session was 
excellent. She sipped ginger ale and had a smoke. "I do get feelings while 
delivering the stuff," she said, "wondering if I'm giving it the best way — 
like that material about the fetus not taking its death as a failure, but an 
experience. That would be hard for most people to understand . . . " 
("Not once they get the idea," I said. "They'd have to learn to think in 
new ways, but they could do it. It would make a lot more sense to them then, 
than thinking in the old ways." 
(A few minutes before I was set to leave at 7:00, after we'd read the 
prayer, Jane said she wanted to talk. It developed that she's feeling more 
impatient, and really wants to be able to sit up — say in a lounge chair like 
the people from the infirmary men tioned. Only her ben t legs would preven t 
her from taking any position except the ones she uses in bed. She said she'd 
even thought of asking her doctor for help — "except that I stay away from 
doctors as much as possible," she said with a half laugh. 
(I said I've been waiting for her legs to begin to move, so that she can 
move more, and get out of the bed into a chair of some sort, but since that 
hasn't happened yet there isn't much we can do. I'd expected leg movement 
before this, but we'll have to wait. 
(I didn't realize it until I got home, but I forgot to read the session to 
Jane. However, she remembered that Seth had said she was to make a friend 
of impatience. But her impatience is growing, no doubt about it, and if it 
continues to do so I'm sure it will bring about — even force — changes in 
her behavior and attitude. I know it's coming. I hope — I expect — that 
the body will have prepared itself for the changes in routine and motion 
when they do finally arrive.) 
• D<± • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
JANUARY 30,1984 
4:35 RM. MONDAY 
(This morning I called our lawyer, and got the necessary confirmation 
on several matters — the $10,000 exemption limit on donations, and so 
forth. He agreed with my idea to open a separate account for fund checks. 
He also asked for our copy of Reality Change, to copy for the file, and I 
added a copy of Maude's letter also. I worked on Dreams this morning, 
and also did some quick rough work on a first draft of my own letter to be 
sent to those who give us money. 
(The day was about 32 when I left for 330, although Jane's room was 
getting cold. There was no heat, and one of the staff had called maintenance, she said. She ale a good lunch. Snow, which had been predicted, 
began to fall around 2:30; there is a heavier storm south of us. I hoped it 
didn't get too bad by supper time. 
(3:00. Jane put on lipstick, 'then looked briefly in the mirror. 1 worked 
on mail. A maintenance man came, but couldn't find out what was wrong 
with the healer. He left to get tools. Jane had to be covered while he was in 
the room, but for a long while I didn't hear her complaining about this 
today. 
(Shawn look her temperature — 98.3, and pulse. 
(3:55. Jane began reading yesterday's session, doing but a fair job. She 
was interrupted at 4:05 by Diana, who took her blood pressure — 
102/64 — "just fine." She finished the session five minutes later, doing 
better at the end. 
(4:15. Lynn gave Jane eyedrops. Ten minutes later Jane began the session. Just before she did, we were treated to the rather strong and tasty smell 
of liver and onions, coming up the elevator shaft across the hallfrom our door, 
from the kitchen in the basement. Food odors often waft up to us that way.) 
I bid you another fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
A session, no matter how brief, does indeed help accentuate the 
healing processes. 
Inner improvements are occurring, that have not as yet actually 
appeared in physical motion, but will indeed shortly begin to show 
themselves as easier motion. Again, it is important that Ruburt realize that his impatience is now a mental and physical, natural aspect 
of the healing processes themselves. 
BIOLOGICALLY VALID THOUGHTS • 101 • 
His overall improved condition leads him to anticipate even 
greater changes. This is mixed of course with strong surges of desire, 
and the release of that desire is all-important — for now he truly wants 
(underlined) to walk normally, and is willing — more than willing — 
to give up any fears or doubts that have stood in his way in the past. 
That is why I emphasize a new (underlined) beginning, for it is 
from that viewpoint that he will be structuring his life from now on. 
I may or may not return, again according to those rhythms of 
which I speak — but again, know that I am present and approachable. 
("Okay. Thank you." 
(4:41 P.M. Even though it's a brief one, I think the session is a very 
important one. It signals the incipience of a new way of life — most interesting. It also reminds me of something Seth said many years ago — that 
when Jane passionately wanted to get rid of the symptoms, she would do so. 
I've never forgotten that idea. I think today's session shows that Jane has 
either reached that point of passionate desire, or is very close to it. 
(I should add that our dear friends, Bill and Peg Gallagher, visited 
Jane rather la te las t nigh t, and brough t with them a bottle of wine which the 
three of them proceeded to drain. Jane was surprised and touched. 
(I should also add that Sue, one of the aides we've become acquainted 
with, showed us pictures of her two young sons. Those gorgeous children 
struck home with me for many reasons — partly because of Seth's material, 
and partly because I think at my own age [65] I've come to appreciate more 
and more the truly creative act that being a parent is. I told Sue that her 
children were great, and meant it. So did Jane. I wouldn't mind Seth commenting on my own evolving views of parenthood sometime. 
(Perhaps two or three inches of snow fell this afternoon; now I'll probably shovel for a while in the driveway. No problem driving home.) 
JANUARY 31,1984 
4:30 P.M. TUESDAY 
(Jane didn't call last night. She said Debbie Harris visited. I shoveled 
quite a bit of snow in the driveway last night after I finished typing yesterday's session, and for the first time in a long while felt the old panic return. 
It was gone by the time I went to bed, but taught me that sometimes the old 
ideas and beliefs die hard. I shoveled the rest of the driveway this morning, 
• D<± • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
and felt much better — although traces of the same feeling in the throat 
returned for a time. 
(Last night I had a rather vivid dream that I described to Jane before 
today 9s session. I dreamed that I bought a new red, sporty-looking sedan car 
at a dealer's. He wasn 't a very nice or pleasant man, younger than me, who 
swore a lot. I believe I told him off once or twice. After picking out the carl 
ivanted at the agency, I left to get the money. When I returned I saw that a 
family of five people — parents and three young children — were in the 
car, and ready to drive away. The obnoxious dealer told me that he'd sold 
the car to the family, and had set aside an identical green car for me. 
(I got really mad a t him, and told him off in no uncertain terms, threatening, I believe, legal action if I didn't get that car back that he'd promised 
me. I got it. I saw the family with children standing to one side, quietly 
waiting, wearing hats and topcoats, and so forth. They were nice-looking 
average people. I got in my red car. End of dream. 
(I didn't eat lunch because Lynn had arranged a surprise birthday 
parly for one of the nurses, and she invited me to share in the food. I got to 
330 by 12:40, but still had to wait until the tray came at 1:30. The food 
was delicious. Jane and I shared it. The strawberry cake was impossibly rich 
and sweet, though. 
(When I walked into 330Jane tvas singing to herself in a loiv voice. She 
wanted to be turned right away, since she'cl been on her side since 10:30, after 
getting back early from hydro. She said she had a whole bunch of old songs 
she sang to herself — not Sumari, * but the old standbys. I knew many of 
the melodies, but few words or titles. She ate a good lunch, and so did I.Jane 
gave me a bag of unshelled peanuts that I brought home for the squirrels. 
(2:30. Jane had a cigarette. By 3:00 she began reading yesterday's session, doing fairly okay with pauses. I worked on mail while she finished at 
3:14. I told her that yesterday I got a box of 64 letters from our publisher, 
Prentice-Hall. 
(3:55. After another smoke, Jane starting rereading the session for January 29 again — this time doing quite a bit better than she had earlier 
today. She finished well at 4:13. 
*BothJane and I belong to the family of consciousness that Seth calls Sumari. 
Jane can write, speak, and sing in Sumari — rapid, seemingly-nonsense words that 
she unhesitatingly translates into English prose and poetry of great beauty. (I can 
write in Sumari, but Jane has to translate it for me — and I'm always surprised at the 
results.) My wife has a powerful singing voice. See her material on Sumari in Adventures in Consciousness. 
BIOLOGICALLY VALID THOUGHTS 
• 101 • 
(While we talked, and as I wrote some of these notes for typing when I 
got home, I suddenly began to understand my dream of last night. The car 
stands for my travels through the psyche, and the family represented conventional America and its everyday beliefs, which I rejected. By demanding 
the red car that I wanted, I insisted that I go my own way, and in my own 
way. The dealer could possibly be me, voicing my own doubts and conflicts 
with society. Jane thought I was right. I've had much better results interpreting my own dreams in recent months, by the way. I now make intuitive 
connections that I seemed to be opaque to in previous years. 
(Jane's Seth voice was good, as it had been yesterday. The heater in 330 
was working again, for some mysterious reason, since Jane said no one had 
been in to check it today, and yesterday the fellow hadn 7 been able to get it 
going. The window was open a good foot, but the room was still warm.) 
Now I bid you another fond good afternoon. 
("Afternoon, Seth.") 
Brief dictation. (Longpause.) This optimism is reflected in many 
other areas of life also. 
Many birds in their fantastic migrations demonstrate an amazing 
optimism, traveling thousands of miles to distant shores, almost literally flying by faith, as it were, ignoring all dangers, unbeseiged by 
doubts. There is no hesitancy, but the sure flight. Birds do not question whether or not the weather will be favorable, the winds fair or 
foul. They simply fly toward their destination. Even if some birds 
do fall or die, this in no way impedes or undermines the faith of the 
others. 
Monarch butterflies, in their remarkable migrations, often fly 
toward land that they have never seen themselves — and yet they 
reach their destination. 
In all such cases there is an inbred biological faith, that courage 
and vitality, that biological optimism. It acts the same in people, triggering the necessary bodily responses. Only when that optimism is 
severely tampered with do the physical mechanisms falter. Even 
then, however, all creatures are sustained by that innate gift, that 
inner sense of security that not only propels creatures toward life, 
but safely conducts them past physical life and past death's doorway. 
(Pause at 4:40.) Comments. 
You yourself did an excellentjob interpreting your own dream, covering all of its main points and meanings. It signals your determination 
• D<± • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
not to be curtailed by those conventional beliefs that pervade in your 
society. 
Again, I accelerate those coordinates that quicken Ruburt's healing processes. I may or may not return, according to those rhythms of 
which I speak. But know that I am indeed present and approachable. 
("Yes. Thank you." 
(4:43 P.M. I read the session to Jane. 1 said Fd forgotten to ask Seth to 
commen t on my feelings about parenthood these days, especially as Fd felt 
them yesterday when looking at the photos of the aide Sue's children. Jane 
suggested I remind Seth to do so tomorrow. 
(Then I told her about the article Fd just taken from Science News last 
night, concerning the abilities of animals, birds and bees to carry maps of 
their terrain in their heads. Very interesting. 
(I remember also seeing an article not long ago on the migrations of the 
Monarch butterfly, but doubt if Til be able to locate that one easily. 
(Jane and I talked about her legs, motion, and so forth as I was getting 
ready to leave at prayer time. She then said that she'd picked up something 
from Seth — to the effect that we should live each day without loorry as best 
we could, and let the future take care of itself. Fm probably not quoting her 
completely or correctly here, since I didn't write down what she told me. She 
can add information, if necessary, after reading this note, and Fll incorporate it in tomorrow's session. Fm curious.) 
FEBRUARY 1,1984 
4:10 RM. WEDNESDAY 
(Jane didn't call last night. It was only 10 above when I got up. I took 
a shower, ate breakfast and fed the cats, put the trash out to be picked up by 
the service we subscribe to, and gave both Classie and *Black Dog" — 
whose name, Margaret Bumbalo told me, is Missy — snacks of dry cat 
food. Both dogs belong to a neighbor. 
(Jane wanted to be turned at once when I got to 330, since she'd been 
on her side since returning from hydro at 11:00. I was late because 1'd 
stopped at the post office. 
(She was gloomy and afraid. She'd had a pain in her side lying there, 
and was afraid tha t it was something serious — but when I put her on her 
back she began to feel better, and thought the pain might only be from gas. 
Yet her mood persisted through lunch — of which she ate little, by the way. 
BIOLOGICALLY VALID THOUGHTS 
• 101 • 
When I asked her if she was up to her old tricks, she said, "I know what I'm 
doing — but that doesn't mean I can't goof up once in a while." 
(2:45. She put on lipstick and looked quickly at herself in the mirror. 
After that she was still very quiet as she had a smoke and I did mail. At 
3:30 she started reading yesterday's session, and did fairly well considering 
her mood. She toas interrupted by Carla taking her temperature — 98.3. 
(4:00. After finishing the session, Jane told me now that she'd also been 
very blue last night, and "really got scared" this morning at the pain in her 
side, "imagining all sorts of things." I couldn't say too much, considering 
my own panicky reaction when I shoveled snow yesterday, but I did remark 
that we'd slipped back into the old ivays of dealing with events. 
(Now Jane corrected the quotation she'd received from Seth as I was 
leaving last night, and that I'd tried to remember: "The way toward health 
is simplicity itself You can make plans for the future, but do not worry 
about the fu ture. Live each day." Besides being excellent advice, I'm citing 
the quote here because it triggered the opening lines of the session today.) 
Now: I bid yoti another fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
Dictation. (Longpause.) The way toward health is simplicity itself. 
It is the natural, easiest way to behave, yet this natural mental 
behavior is often quite difficult for the intellect to understand, since 
the intellect is apt to enjoy playing with complications and solving 
problems. Therefore, to the intellect it often seems ludicrous to 
imagine that the answer to a question lies within the question itself. 
(Longpause.) All of nature demonstrates this almost miraculous 
seeming simplicity. Plants and animals and all of life's aspects take it 
quite for granted that the sun will shine and the rains will fall in the 
way best conducive to all creatures. Animals certainly do not worry 
about tomorrow's weather conditions. (Long pause.) It may be true 
that animals do not need to know tomorrow's weather, since they do 
not plant seeds or collect the harvest. It is perfectly fine to make 
plans for the future, yet each individual should live day by day, without worrying (underlined) about the outcome of those plans. 
The physical body can only react in the present moment. Worrying about future events, or dwelling upon past unfavorable situations, only confuses the body's mechanisms, and undermines their 
precise activity in the present moment. 
• D<± • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
(4:20.) I am not saying that anyone should pretend that unfavorable circumstances do not sometimes exist, or that they may not be 
encountered in the past, present, or future. It is also true, however, 
that advantageous events occur with a far greater frequency than do 
negative ones — otherwise the world that you know simply would 
not exist. It would have disappeared in the throes of destruction or 
calamity. 
In a basic way, it is against nature's purposes to contemplate a 
dire future, for all of nature operates on the premise that the future 
is assured. Nature is everywhere filled with promise — not only the 
promise of mere survival, but the promise of beauty and fulfillment. 
Once again, that keen sense of promise is innate within each portion 
of the body. It triggers the genes and chromosomes into their proper 
activity, and it promotes feelings of optimism, exuberance, and 
strength. 
Again, sometime later we will discuss those conditions that can 
undermine such fine creativity. In the meantime, however, live each 
day as fully and joyfully as possible. Imagine the best possible results 
of any plans or projects. Above all, do not concentrate upon past 
unfavorable events, or imagined future ones. 
(4:29.) Comments. 
Your own touches of panic, and Ruburt's blueness and fear, were 
both remnants of old habits, as both of you understand. 
You can, and must, trust the body's activity. It naturally seeks fulfillment, vitality, and the fullest possible expression. 
(An extremely important observation. 
(Long pause.) Ruburt had a dream with excellent connotations, 
in which he looked through a beautiful old house of lovely carved 
wood and spacious rooms, and decided to move into the house, even 
though it was in an area that had previously nearly been condemned — signifying that he was indeed rising from beliefs that he 
condemned into a larger, spacious area of expression. 
("Last night?"Jane hadn't told me about the dream. 
(No te: Just as Jane had had this dream, I'd read an article in the StarGazette to the effect that a few blocks near downtown Elmira, including the 
apartment house we'd lived in at 458 W. Water Street, had been designated a 
Historical Preservation Area by New York State. I meant to save the article, 
BIOLOGICALLY VALID THOUGHTS 
• 101 • 
but forgot to. I think the area is bounded by Walnut, West Water, and 
Church Streets, back toward downtown.) 
Indeed. I may or may not return, again according to those rhythms 
of which I speak — but know that I am present and approachable. 
(4:35. "Will you say something about the feelings I've had about parenthood lately V9) 
Let us take a break. 
("Okay." 
(Jane had ginger ale and a few puffs. "If you hadn't asked, he was 
going to say something about your parenthood thing," she said. We talked 
about how strange it was that no one had been in yet to lake her blood pressure and pulse — not that it would have mattered if they weren't taken. 
Resume at 4:40.) 
Now: If you examine your feelings about parenthood in general, 
you will see that they bear an astonishing similarity to your feelings 
about your painting and our work. Only the focus is different. 
You are indeed both parents of an amazing body of work, and the 
psychic parents of innumerable people of all ages. You have set 
aside, however, the conventional idea of a family, as symbolized by 
your (car) dream of the other evening. You are actually exchanging 
one kind of a family for another, vaster concept, that also involves 
parenthood, however — but a psychic rather than a physical parenthood. The letters you receive are often like letters children write to 
their parents. 
("Well, I guess that's it, "Jane said after a pause. 
("Okay. Thank you." 
(4:45 P.M. I read the session to Jane. I told her it was so good I was 
going to make an extra copy to keep before me in the writing room. I read it 
to her again at 6:55 P.M. I'd been thinking about it ever since it ended. 
(I told Jane that we have to follow it — that we simply must dump all 
else and trust the body, that nothing else makes any sense any more, that it's 
the key to our futures. She agreed, of course. She said she's going to start 
with Day One tomorrow, and take it from there, trusting the body, not 
dwelling upon the past, and leaving the future open. It is simplicity itself, 
I told her, and we must never again forget it on a consistent basis. Slipping 
up once in a while won't mean anything then. But part of our success will 
depend on keeping these simple goals always in mind, before us. 
• D<± • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
(Jane called at 9:45 this evening, with Carta's help, as I was finishing 
this session It's mighty cold out.) 
FEBRUARY 2,1984 
4:02 RM. THURSDAY 
(Note: This is "Day 1, "Jane reminded me. 
(The temperature was only 5 above when I got up at 6:30 this morning, 
but was up to 25 degrees when I left for 330. 
(Jane was good, had been back from hydro since 11:00 again. Yesterday 
we'd received our copies of the Bantam paperback issue of The Nature of 
the Psyche, and I'd brought a book in to show Jane. She thought it was as 
terrible — as cheap and sensationalized — as I did. I hadn't even gotten 
mad, Hold her. I wanted a word from Seth on what our reactions should, or 
could, be, in light of yesterday's session about living in the moment. 
(I also had two more questions for her boy, I said as I fed her an average lunch. One was what does the staff, the people we see every day at the 
hospital, think of us? The other was Seth's comments on a very vivid and 
long dream I'd had last night. 
(In the dream, all of which was in brilliant color, I'd combined many 
elemen ts, which I described in more detail to Jane than I'll give here. Firs t, 
we'd moved back to 458 W. Water — which I seem to do several times a 
week — and looking out my old studio windows, I saw my father cutting 
hair like a barber out in the driveway in front of the garage. I invited him 
to come up and take over the studio for a barbershop. Laughing, looking 
younger than his years, he did so. Then I was working forfake 
Ruppenlhal, 
my old boss at Artistic Card Company, tvhen he was art director. I had left 
Artistic in 1972, to concentrate upon helping Jane with the Seth material. 
In the dream I was drawing foot-high oval letters in black ink, but was worried about doing a good job because my hand was shaky. Then I realized I 
could cu t ou t the letters from cardboard or some such, and ink them in tha t 
way. Next, Jake and I were walking down a street in a town, on our way to 
see Jane's mother. Midway in the trip Jake left me, saying I could go on 
alone from there. 
(When I approached the room in which I knew Marie lay in bed, crippled by arthritis, I heard Jane and her mother inside. They were talking and 
laughing and crying all at once. I went in and saw them both in a double 
BIOLOGICALLY VALID THOUGHTS 
• 
101 
• 
bed, fully clothed, arms around each other, fvr&iving each other. Both were 
younger than their years, both had shining black hair Marie was bedridden, but Jane was perfectly healthy, and had come to forgive her mother, or 
make up with her. Quite a scene. The entire dream had made an impression 
on me, I told Jane. 
(I told Jane that I didn't think I'd figured out very much of it, beyond 
that I seemed to be remaking the past, and that all of the figures in it except 
her seemed to be figures of au thority from that past. I also felt tha t the idea 
of authority was somehow connected with my shaky right hand, and since 
this aspect of the dream wasn't discussed today, I'd like Seth to comment on 
it tomorrotv if he has a session. I seem to remember from old pendulum sessions, that my mother is involved with the shaky hand, although she wasn 'I 
in this dream. Stella Butts had died in November 1973, at 81. 
(3:00. Jane began reading yesterday's session, which I think is an excellent one, but she didn't do well at all. She quit for a smoke at 3:12 while I 
worked on mail. She tried again at 3:20, doing just a little better. I kept 
thinking about the session, listening to Jane try to read it as I looked over 
mail. Finally at 3:291 read the rest of the session to her. 
(3:36. Jennifer emptied Jane's Foley. The staff is very busy. 
(I mentioned the three questions for Seth: 1. What does the staff at the 
hospital think of us? 2. How should we react to the Bantam cover situation ? 3. My dream. 
("Oh, he'll never get to answer all three of them, "Jane said. Her Seth 
voice was again good.) 
Now: I bid you another fond good afternoon. 
(No sooner had Seth spoken than Lynn came in to give Jane eyedrops. I 
told her I'd done it myself an hour ago.) 
Dictation. In his own mind, Ruburt calls these ideas, taken 
together, "The New Way." 
The ideas themselves are quite ancient, of course. They are 
expressed by many cultures and religions, esoteric groups and cults 
from the past, and continuing into the present. Their strength, vitality, and worth has been greatly undermined, however, by distortions, 
negative ideas, and some sheer nonsense. 
In other words, these concepts, so natural to all of creation, have 
not been practiced by humanity in anything like their pure form. To 
that extent they do indeed represent a new way. They run directly 
• D<± • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
counter to much of your official knowledge and contemporary 
thought as far as the mainstream of world culture is concerned. 
Where such ideas ar£ practiced, they are frequently contaminated by 
fanaticism, superstition, and expediency. 
The main point I want to make is that this "new way" (longpause) 
is the ideal and easiest complement to nature's own innate integrity — 
(4:12. Shawn came in to do all of Jane's vitals. Temperature 98.6. Jane 
had a cigarette at 4:17.1 read what she'd given so far to her while Shawn 
went for ginger ale. She ivas back with it at 4:21. I imagine the interruption cut short dictation.) 
Now: Comments. 
Yesterday's session should be read two or three times a week 
for now. 
Your dream did indeed deal with changing the past and the past 
beliefs, and therefore with inserting a new present, and a newer future. 
Often hair is a symbol for strength, but in this case it represents the 
strength of old beliefs, and your father is a barber who cuts away 
those — whereas in the past he followed many quite negative beliefs 
and concepts. Jake also represented any beliefs of your own dealing 
with work in general that can carry you so far and no further. You correctly interpreted the affair between Ruburt and his mother — an 
excellent omen, by the way. 
(Now Seth came through with a sentence I didn't think was correct:) 
The Bantam cover in its own way offers in the most positive of 
ways, despite your natural objections to i t . . . It suggests the most 
unfortunate sensationalism, of course, yet people attracted to it for 
that reason are precisely the people it is important to reach. The 
ideas in the book proper will quite change their negative, charged 
ideas of psychic activity in general. 
This does not mean that you should not write a clear letter stating your own reaction against the cover, if you so choose. 
It will take some time to discuss the staff's opinion of you both, so 
I suggest that we leave that for another time of your choosing. 
I may or may not return, again according to those rhythms of 
which I speak, but know that I am present and approachable. 
("I'd like to go over that first sentence of the Bantam material — I've 
made a mistake, or something's wrong somewhere." 
(At Seth's request I reread the sentence twice.) 
BIOLOGICALLY VALID THOUGHTS 
• 101 • 
No, there is an error somewhere . . . The Bantam cover, despite 
your obvious dissatisfaction, aids our work in the positive of ways. 
(Again at his request, I read back to Seth the sentence he'd just given.) 
You are clear. 
(4:32 P.M. I told Jane that I didn't know whether or not I'd get 
involved in a controversy over the Bantam cover. I didn't even ivant to 
spend time thinking about it, especially in light of yesterday's session. 
(I cite the verbatim transcript involving Seth correcting the sentence 
he'd given, because as far as I can remember, that's the first time it's ever 
happened. A pretty fair record over the years, Jane. Sleep well. I love you.) 
FEBRUARY 3,1984 
4:03 P.M. FRIDAY 
(Jane didn't call last night. The temperature was already up to 44 degrees 
when I left for 330. Jane was already on her back — she'd refused to go to 
hydro when they hadn't come by 12:30. I told her I brought Session 903 of 
Dreams with me so I coulcl ask her a couples of questions. She said okay. 
(Jane ate an average amount for lunch. Afterward she had trouble reading Session 903, and I tried to read portions of it to her. Hoioever, I didn 'I 
think our talk about mammals, animals, transmigration and so forth went 
very well. Jane said she got irritated at the questions, and I ended up feeling the same way. However, I did figure out the way to handle the few notes 
for the session, and decided to forget others I'd started struggling with. I 
already regretted the time I was spending on the session for Dreams. 
(Jane said I was really saying that I was settling for second best. I agreed, 
adding that I saw no help for it if ever I was to finish the book. Above all, I 
ivant to get the job done so I can go on to other things. I added that I 
tuas trying to avoid projecting any hassles with Dreams into the future, 
in line with the session for the day before [February 1 ], though I was aware 
that some of what I was saying contradicted elements of that session. 
However, I'll work those out. I do want to get Dreams done as soon as possible, and will not be getting into any fixes of a similar nature in the years 
to come. 
(3:15. Jane began reading yesterday's session. Not the best, but she got 
along with many halting attempts as I wrote these notes. She did better as 
she wen t along, and finished a t 3:42. A couple of minu tes la ter Carla took 
her temperature. It was 100.2. "Oh, you do have a fever, " she said. Jane 
• D<± • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
looked puzzled, since she felt okay. Diana took Jane's blood pressure and 
pulse. "You do feel warm," she said. "I don 'I have any damn fever, "Jane 
said when they'd left. 
(Jane wants me to note that this is Day 2 of her new approach to life, 
based on the session for February L I do think the session is an excellent 
one, and Fve copied it for use at the house, too.) 
Now — I bid you another most fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
Comments. 
In regard to your dream: The shakiness represented values and 
ideas from your mother, primarily about work — beliefs you always 
felt were shaky. In the dream you manage to circvimnavigate their 
effects. In daily waking life the shakiness still represents leftover 
uncertainty, and it is more noticeable whenever any strong interruptions occur. 
As far as the book passages are involved, it is indeed very difficult 
to write about complicated matters with a simple vocabulary. This is 
what we try to do, of course. We try to use words that have an overall 
meaning for the general reader, and then make any necessary — 
(4:08. Lynn came in to give Jane eyedrops, then left to get some iced 
ginger ale. I read to Jane what she'd given so far) 
— distinctions to make certain that the passage is correct. 
Your question about transmigration (in Session 903 in Dreams) 
was an excellent one, and did indeed make the matter clear. It is a 
temptation at times to use more specific scientific terms, but these 
would be as confusing as the various definitions and classifications 
(with humor) that you read in the dictionary, so overall we try to hit a 
"happy medium.w (With more humor.) 
Again, do review Wednesday's session often — and it is a good 
idea to designate Day 1 and so forth, as each of you try to make this 
a new beginning, and take each day as it is, one day at a time. Now I 
may or may not return, again according to those rhythms of which I 
speak, but know that I am present and approachable. 
("Okay, Thank you." 
(4:14 P.M. Seth, then, verified my own pendulum information about 
my mother's beliefs and my reactions to them being involved with my shaky 
right hand.) 
BIOLOGICALLY VALID THOUGHTS 
• 101 • 
FEBRUARY 4,1984 
4:26 RM. SATURDAY 
(Jane called last night with Carta's help. Before that she'cl had visits 
from our friends Debbie Harris and Elisabeth — who were there at the same 
lime. Elisabeth left her some yellow primroses, very nice, and a place mat 
made by a lady in Germany whom Elisabeth, being German herself, has 
written to for us. 
(The day was again warm — 42 — when I left for 330 at noon. Jane 
had just had her dressings changed when 1 got there. She'd gone down to 
hydro at 10:30, and it had taken all that lime to get through the routine. I 
told her to refuse to go if she thinks she's going to have to wait long periods, 
but I can't see her doing that, 1 guess. 
(Today is Day 3 of fane's new routine, following the session on February 1. She said she ca tches herself all the time getting off the track, then tries 
to remind herself of her new healthier goals — living in the momen t, thinking positively, and so on. 
(She ate an average lunch. I described my very vivid dream of last night. 
It was most exhilarating. I dreamed I was jogging along a country road 
beside the Chemung River on the way toward Sayre. The road ivas similar 
to the old river road we used to drive. I wore shorts and a sweatshirt and 
had white hair. I was amazed and delighted at the smooth, effortless way my 
body was performing as I ran, especially for one my age. I really enjoyed the 
freedom of motion, of strength, running in the sunny summer air. 
(I knew Fd been imprisoned, and that I tuas now free. Also that behind 
me, not loo close, ran a police van, with several cops in it checking up on me. 
Every so often they came closer, but didn't interfere. And across the river at 
one spot, I saw a large group of men romping or working on the bank — I 
think they ivere still incarcerated. I waved to them as I ran past, opposite them. 
(I told Jane that I though t the police in the dream meant that Fd left 
behind me old imprisoning beliefs, that I was now running free of those 
beliefs. Also, the group of men across the river represented old beliefs of mine 
that Fd discarded. I added that if I had the time Fd like to do some jogging 
now, since I have an ability and love for running. 
(Jane wasn't at her best. They had taken her temperature this morning, 
and it had been 100.1. I asked her why it was up again, but she didn't 
know. They take it each shift when it's high. I rang for some ginger ale and 
ice, since the girl who'd promised to bring it an hour ago never showed up. 
• D<± • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
(2:40, Jane read yesterday's session while I read mail, and did quite 
well Much better than she had yesterday. 
(2:55. She started reading the key session for February 1. Again she did 
well After that we seemed to let time get away from us, watching TV and so 
forth. I did a little mail We went over parts of a long letter from Sue 
Watkins, but Jane couldn't read it. She was discouraged, I could tell, and 
I wasn't at my best either. Jane spent a lot of time waiting for people to do 
her vitals, then finally decided on a session.) 
Now: I bid you another fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
Comments. 
Your dream was indeed an excellent "omen." You were escaping 
from the jailhouse of negative beliefs, and you were delighted with 
the new easy motion of your body, once you had been released. 
The feeling of buoyancy is a delightful sensation that is experienced, of course, by all children. The dream was meant to remind 
you of that inner and outer buoyancy and freedom. 
I may or may not return, again because of those rhythms of 
which I speak, but know that I am present and approachable. 
("Okay." 
(4:30 P.M. I hadn't expected the quick ending to the session, since I'd 
thought there were some rather important topics Jane could have discussed, 
such as the reasons for the temperature increase. She showed no signs of 
wanting to, though, so I didn't press the idea on her. On my way home at 
7:10 P.M., I wished I had, and realized that I hadn 'I been much help to her 
at a time of pretty obvious distress. Once, when I'd been massaging her, 
she'd started to talk about the high temperature, but I'd been distracted by 
the tense way she was holding her body and had cut her o f f . Maybe we can 
do better tomorrow. 
(4:33. A gal took Jane's temperature, and it was again at 100. "Oh 
Jesus,"Jane muttered, but said little else, beyond saying that she didn't 
want antibiotics. I felt sure the temperature was connected to the session for 
February 1, though I couldn't say why. 
(I did think of a couple of questions on the way home. What's the reincarnalional background of Jane's symptoms; and why does she still hold her 
right leg so tight against her belly, after all this time following the break at 
the kneel) 
BIOLOGICALLY VALID THOUGHTS 
• 101 • 
FEBRUARY 5,1984 
4:06 RM. SUNDAY 
(This is "Day 4" ofJane's new program. 
(Jane didn't call last night I spent the morning typing letters from 
Jane, Seth, and me for Maude Cardwell to send to donors. I also wrote 
Maude a letter of my own. I did no work on Dreams. 
(The day was about 34 degrees. When I got to 330Jane told me that 
Shawn Peterson had been admitted to intensive care last night with chest 
pains, but that the tests so far have been negative. "The nurses are sicker 
than the patients, "Jane said she heard one of the nurses say this morning 
(Jane didn't go to hydro —just had her face washed. Her blood pressure never was taken yesterday. She had lots to tell me, and acted much 
better than she had yesterday. I felt better, too. Her temperature had been 
taken after I left last night, and early this morning: 99 and 97.8 — doivn 
both times. After I left she gave herself "a good talking to," about trusting 
her body, and so forth, and this helped a lot. 
(JeffKarder, Jane's doctor, visited her this morning. He was very pleased 
with her progress. "For him to say very good is something, "Jane said. "Fvebeen 
getting good reports about you," he told her. He also askedJane about our insurance hassles. She explained as best she could, and about the infirmary. Jane 
asked him why her right legivas shorter than the left one, andJeff explained that 
the break had healed but that the bones were out of alignment, hence the shortness. Fie said it would lake a major operation to restore the leg, with no guarantees that it could be done. A "minor" operation could fix the leg well enough 
so she could sit up, he said, after Jane said she wanted to start sitting up. 
(It's hardly a coincidence, then, that one of the questions I had for Seth 
today, and had added to yesterday's session, concerned her right leg and 
why she wasn't straightening it out. The negative part ofJeff's information 
is that he said she couldn't sit up until the leg was fixed to some degree, at 
least. I'd expected that sort of diagnosis for some lime. "Shit, "Jane said, "if 
my body can recover like it has, then it can fix the leg too." I believe it. Jane 
took the visit well indeed this morning, and I congratulate her for doing so. 
I wanted to ask Seth about the whole thing anyhow, since he's said several 
times that she'll be able to ivalk normally and with some confidence. 
(Jane said Jeff was plainly surprised a t her improvemen ts, bu t that at 
the same time he was condemning her to staying in bed. I said that from his 
position he could do little else. 
• D<± • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
(Jane had eaten a better lunch today. She was obviously relieved that her 
temperature was dropping. At 3:15 she began reading yesterday's session, 
and did well, her best in some days. She said she tried to explain to Jeff how 
she was uncomfortable and impatient in hydro, but got nowhere. She could 
see he knew nothing of what she was talking about, so finally she just quit. 
(I showed Jane the list of questions I've been acquiring, at Seth's own 
suggestion, and told her that one of them concerned the insurance situation — that I didn't want to mess it up by demanding action from our 
lawyer, say. Seth had said six weeks ago that the issue would be settled to my 
satisfaction, and our lawyer had said not to worry, and that's the last we've 
heard. I added that I couldn't imagine the hospital not demanding action 
before this —yet they haven't. Seth had said the question ivould be cleared 
up without any long wait. 
(3:40. At my suggestion Jane began to try writing with one of my pens. 
She managed to do something, - resting the pad against her right knee — 
which is sore to the touch. She even held the pen in her right hand. I'm to 
bring in the clipboard tomorrow. I'm sure she can make progress here. It migh t 
free her enough so she could write poetry at night, say, when she's alone. 
(I explained to Jane my mental saying, "Sorry, Mom, but I don't have 
time any more for your shaky beliefs or ideas," as it had spontaneously 
grown out ofSeth's comments about why my right hand is shaky, in a recent 
session. The suggestion is working fairly well. I think it's quite humorous 
and original, and so does Jane. It may have a cumulative effect, and I'd 
like Seth to comment. 
(A t 4:00 Lynn gave Jane eyedrops. Jeff had told Jane her eyes looked 
better, too. Jane wanted to get started on the session, which she felt might be 
longer than usual, so I told her not to wait for people to do her vitals.) 
Now: I bid you another most fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
Comments. 
You were each surrounded by some highly unfortunate beliefs, 
that were at least partially paranoid, but in any case unfortunate. 
They were beliefs that had to do with talent, ability, or genius — 
(4:07. A nurse came in to take Jane's temperature. It was 98.3 — 
down again; she got Jane some ginger ale. 
(4:12.) These were distortive offshoots connected with misinterpretations of ideas of equality, connected with a democratic government. These same ideas also had involvements with psychology, 
BIOLOGICALLY VALID THOUGHTS 
• 101 • 
dealing with "the norm," the average man, and so forth. People try 
to be as much as possible like their neighbors, hiding eccentricities, 
failings and even talents and abilities that might close them off from 
their fellows. The end resvilt was a series of beliefs that ran as follows: 
If you are highly talented in any way, play the talent down or be 
extremely humble in its performance or expression, because other 
people will envy you, or be afraid of you, or try to drag you down "to 
their own level." 
(Long pause at 4:16.) The more Linusual and original your gift, 
the more you must protect yourself from the distrust of others. This 
line of belief continues as follows: If your talent is extremely unique 
or original, it may be safer to deny it entirely, or to adopt some disability or handicap that will quell the jealousy or envy of others who 
might otherwise hunt you down. 
Now both of you were saturated with those beliefs — Ruburt 
because of his poetry and writing, and you becaLise of your art. You 
early went into commercial work, where your love of painting could 
be sheltered beneath the Average Joe's love of money. That is, you 
obviously were an artist in order to make a living. This was just 
another version of the American male's conventional role. 
Ruburt, as a young woman, felt that writers were on the outskirts — 
(4:23. Carla took Jane's blood pressure and pulse. Jane had a smoke 
while I read the session to her so far. 
(4:29.)— of society. Period. 
His beliefs about poets were contaminated by ideas that said that 
the poet was too sensitive, too vulnerable to life's experiences — 
that this sensitivity brought weakness instead of strength, and that 
true artists or true poets came to a tragic end for that reason. 
Other personal beliefs held by both of you to some extent or 
another, with the usual cultural connotations, stressed a false humility over the rightful natural pride of ability. Such beliefs are often 
given to children, appearing in such forms as, "don't be a showoff," 
"don't be an exhibitionist," followed by, again, the dire warning that 
your fellow creatures suspect any neighbor who is different or who 
shows any superior abilities. 
This entire belief system was detrimental enough, when you were 
devoted to writing and painting as these are generally understood. 
When Ruburt's psychic abilities began to show themselves, however, 
• D<± • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
those same beliefs made both of you even more cautious than 
before, and more worried about reprisal from others — and as far as 
Ruburt was concerned, more worried about criticism or scorn. All of 
those beliefs existed along with many unfortunate ones that were 
sexually oriented — those that dictated, for example, the traditional 
roles of man and wife, or man and woman. Ruburt felt some guilt in 
expressing psychic abilities in such a marked fashion, when it 
seemed that the male of the relationship should be the most highly 
talented, and by far the most successful financially (intently). So your 
roles in that manner upset both of you at times. • 
(4:40.) Ruburt, at one period, even feared that the young psychologist at Oswego was correct — that his psychic abilities were 
mere attempts to prove himself superior to you.* These are all 
beliefs that both of you have wrestled with over the years. You also 
had many excellent beliefs going with you also, so that you did 
indeed use your abilities and express your natures. You enjoyed your 
relationship with each other, the relationship with friends, and you 
did also enjoy some financial success. 
(Long pause.) The effect of those old negative beliefs, however, 
was stronger in Ruburt than in yourself, for he certainly thought at 
one time that if he curtailed physical motion people would not 
attack him for his amazing psychic and mental motion. The inhibition of physical motion obviously took place little by little, until he 
began to learn the truth — that human beings are meant to express 
all of their abilities, mental and physical, and that life is an arena of 
expression. In fact, life is expression. 
At one point, for a while, Ruburt did no writing or sessions, and 
was physically nearly immobile besides. Then he began to learn the 
lessons that were needed — that life is expression, and that it is safe 
for him to move mentally and physically, using both his psychic, creative, mental and physical abilities to their fullest. 
(4.48. The aide brought the supper tray and left the door open. There 
was noise in the hall, but Jane continued:) 
*In 1965, in response to my letter, an older and very respected parapsychologist — "Dr. Instream," Jane called him — invited Jane and me to attend the hypnosis symposium he was to conduct at a New York State college. Doctors, dentists, and 
psychologists attended. It was there that Jane and I had our most unfortunate 
encounter with the young psychologist. See chapters 6,7, and 8 of The Seth Material 
BIOLOGICALLY VALID THOUGHTS 
• 101 • 
This session will serve as a reminder, however, to both of you, and 
will help brush away the remainder of any old lingering beliefs. Earlier, Ruburt was afraid to trust his body, afraid to let his body heal 
him, for fear he would be attacked by others. You both also believed 
that you must protect your special abilities with all of your might — 
but you can see the road of contradictions that is constructed in such 
a fashion. 
I am aware of Karder's visit, and your own conversations about 
Ruburt's walking, and so forth — and I intend to answer your questions, but I wanted to give you the preceding material as a necessary 
preliminary. I am also aware of the time limitations. 
("Well, that's no problem.") 
I can say that overall I agree with your decisions, and with 
Ruburt's interpretation of Karder's visit. Some of the material that I 
have just given will help Ruburt find greater release. The body can 
remedy itself. You have only to allow it to do so. I hope that this 
session helps siphon off the edge of any lingering doubts or contradictions. 
("It's very good.") 
Remind me tomorrow of additional questions, and we will continue. I may or may not return, et cetera (with humor), and I am present and approachable. 
("Thank you very much, Seth." 
(4:57 P.M. I read the session to Jane while she had a smoke. "There's a lot 
to think of — that's a powerful session, "she saicl. Indeed. She'd alternately 
sighed and grunted and groaned as I read. I think it will help a great deal. 
(Jane called, with Carla's help, at about 10:00, as I was typing this.) 
FEBRUARY 6,1984 
4:33 P.M. MONDAY 
Georgia — disc, ulcers, surgery 
Shirley — disc, surgery 
Susie — knee, surgery 
Shawn — chest pains 
Robert — coronary unit 
Judy — back 
Rhonda — surgery, unknown 
• D<± • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
Hydro: 
Steve — ulcers 
Debbie — heel, surgery 
Tom — leg 
Mike — shoulder 
(The above is a partial list of staff members who have had serious medical problems that we know about since Jane came into the hospital last 
April 20. These are people we have come into more or less regular contact 
with in our own small circle in the hospital. Magnify their number proportionally amid the 1,000 or so employees at the hospital, and what sort of 
percentage of sick employees would you have? A high one, I think. 
(Jane was singing to herself token I got to 330 today. She'd called last 
night as I was finishing the session. I worked on Dreams this morning, 
and mailed our letters to Maude Cardivell on my way to the hospital this 
noon. The clay was just above freezing. Jane went to hydro this morning. 
She saicl she was singing to herself down there too, while waiting, and an 
attendant came in to ask her what was wrong. 
(After lunch, at 2:45 Jane put on lipstick and looked at herself in the 
mirror. She said she had some extra freedom of motion in her righ t thumb. 
Her temperature today ivas 98.3 — down again. I forgot to ask her what it 
had been this morning. 
(3:36. Jane began reading yesterday's session, and doing quite well I 
worked on mail. 
(3:45. Diana came in. "You're a celebrity," she said, pointing to Jane. 
Diana had found an article about Jane, with picture, in a book on the history 
of Chemung County and Elmira. We'd forgotten about it, but an older retired 
individual had contacted Jane years ago about doing such a project. Neither of 
us coulcl remember his name. I believe someone connected with the Star-Gazette. 
(3:56. Jane resumed reading the session, did well, and finished at 
4:10. She had another cigarette while I did mail. She suggested having a 
short session when the hour began to grow late.) 
Now I bid you another fond good afternoon. 
(uGood afternoon, Seth.") 
Comments. 
There is one other point in particular I wanted to mention, 
though it has, of course, been discussed often before. This is the 
matter of self-approval. 
BIOLOGICALLY VALID THOUGHTS 
• 101 • 
Many of the contradictory beliefs and negative ones discussed in 
yesterday's session led to strong feelings of self-disapproval. The 
beliefs were so contradictory that in living up to an) one of thena you 
actually seemed to be denying others in which you also believed. 
Hence, no matter what you did you were both left with strong- feelings of self-disapproval. 
You are largely over that kind of reaction—yet it is still apt 
to return now and then when you fear that you have not dene as 
well as you should have, or when you have momentarily caught yourself behaving in old ways. A feeling of self-approval is absolutely 
necessary for any true sense of well-being; it is ijot (underlined) 
virtuous in any way to put yourself down, or to punish yourself, 
because you do not feel you have lived up to you? best behavior at 
any given time. 
Do keep an eye out for that kind of reaction, however, so th<it you 
can nip it in the bud. 
Tell Ruburt that the same energy that healed or mended his 
right knee can also straighten it out. The mental exercises he has 
been doing are excellent in that regard. Do not worry about the 
insurance situation. It is being solved, and to your advantage. 
As much as possible, playfully (underlined twice) imagine your 
worries floating away. It might help if you imagine balloons, one 
labeled insurance, another health, and so forth — then imagine 
them floating away, or popping open, or whatever. Again, this should 
be playfully done. You might surprise yourself, and find yourself as 
delighted as a child with a new game. 
I may or may not return again et cetera, but I do activate those 
coordinates that quicken Ruburt's healing processes. 
("It's me,"Jane said after a pause. 
("Thank you." 
(4:45 P.M. 1 forgot to tell Jane about a dream I had last night. Not very 
elaborate: I'd dreamed that I'd been visiting some friends, a married couple, 
I believe, and that they had a number of cats of their own in the place. Our 
Billy was there also. When it came time for me to leave, I started hun ting 
around to find Billy. Each time I picked up a cat, I discovered that I didn't 
have Billy. All of the cats were marked more or less similarly, yet there were 
enough differences in color and pattern so that I could know Billy when 
and if I found him.) 
• D<± • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
FEBRUARY 7,1984 
4:04 RM. TUESDAY 
(Jane called last night Today was cold — 22 degrees when I left for 
330. I stopped at the bank to buy money orders to pay bills. No one had 
taken Jane's temperature this morning, since it had dropped back to normal 
range. After lunch Jane told me that Steve and Tracy had sent her a 
telegram Sunday night, saying they couldn't make it for a variety of reasons. She'd forgotten to tell me. 
(A note: This is "Day 6" of Jane's new campaign to change her thinking. 
(3:02. After lunch Jane began to read yesterday's session, and did quite 
ivell. I answered mail. Jane remembered the name of the retired newspaperman who'd written about us in his history of Chemung County — 
"Burs. "And this triggered my own memory: Tom Byrne. 
(3:15. Jane finished reading the session, and had done quite well. A t 
3:55 a studen t took her blood pressure, which was good. Jane was ready for 
the session early. She decided not to wait for temperature. 
(The room had been warm, and I had the heat off and the window wide open. 
Traffic noise was a bother at times — and that effect reminded me of how often 
such racket had been a problem when we held sessions at 458 W. Water Street) 
Now I bid you another fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
Book dictation. (Long pause, then quite slowly:) All creatures are 
also born, then, with a keen sense of self-approval. 
Each creature is born proud of itself, and loving itself. That same 
self-approval is also experienced in varying ways not only by creatures as you think of them, but also by atoms and molecules, and by 
all orders of matter. 
Ruburt once wrote a poem about a nail on a window sill. He 
endowed the nail with consciousness and self-awareness. Now every 
nail is indeed in its own way responsive to stinruli. It acts and reacts. 
A nail may not choose to jump down from a window still and dance 
about the room, but a nail is indeed aware of the room, of the 
window sill, and aware of the temperature on both sides of the 
window. The atoms and molecules that compose the nail possess 
their own lively consciousnesses. Their motion is directed by electrons, so that within itself the nail actually experiences constant 
motion. Indeed, a dance is executed of great symmetry and rhythm. 
The nail, then, is indeed filled with its own sense of self-approval. 
BIOLOGICALLY VALID THOUGHTS 
• 101 • 
I am mentioning this only to stress the fact that self-delight and 
self-approval (longpause) are natural characteristics — characteristics 
that actually make your entire physical world, and world of experience, possible. 
It is very unfortunate, therefore, when adults inadvertently 
undermine a child's sense of self-approval. A small boy might be 
caught in a lie, for example, and therefore labeled by an adult in the 
angriest of terms as a liar. Instead, a distinction shoLild be made: the 
child made an error — he lied — but he himself is not the error or 
the lie. He can then determine to change his behavior while still 
saving his self-respect. 
(Long pause at 4:16.) All creatures are basically of good intent; 
even when they commit the most dubious of acts, these are usually 
caused by a misdirected good intent. Actaally, many criminals are 
motivated by distorted versions of righteousness. We will have more 
to say about this later in the book, but for now I want to stress the 
importance of self-approval in connection with exuberance, health, 
and well-being. 
End of dictation. I may or may not return, again according to those 
rhythms of which I speak, et cetera, but I do indeed accelerate those 
coordinates that quicken Ruburt's healing processes. I remind you 
also to read the session of the day before yesterday whenever possible. 
("It's me,"Jane said after a pause. 
("Thank you." 
(4:21 P.M.Jane told me that yesterday Mary Jean, who had changed her 
dressings, had remarked upon how well the remaining bedsores are healing. 
(4:45. Dorothy took Jane's temperature — 99.3. After she left Jane 
said, "See, instead of trusting my body I'm mad because my temperature is 
up again like 
that..." 
(She didn't read over the session from the day before yesterday. I'd read 
it this morning at the house.) 
FEBRUARY 8,1984 
4:24 P.M. WEDNESDAY 
(I worked on Dreams this morning. The day ivas cold — about 22 — 
when I left for 330 at 12:30. I'd just turned Jane when the phone rang. It 
was someone called Danny Olson, from a small town in Missouri. He'd 
• D<± • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
Hydro: 
Steve — ulcers 
Debbie — heel, surgery 
Tom — leg 
Mike — shoulder 
(The above is a partial list of s taff members who have had serious medical problems that we know about since Jane came into the hospital last 
April 20. These are people we have come into more or less regular contact 
with in our own small circle in the hospital. Magnify their number proportionally amid the 1,000 or so employees at the hospital, and what sort of 
percentage of sick employees would you have ? A high one, I think. 
(Jane was singing to herself when I got to 330 today. She'd called last 
night as I was finishing the session. I worked on Dreams this morning, 
and mailed our letters to Maude Cardwell on my way to the hospital this 
noon. The day was just above freezing. Jane went to hydro this morning 
She said she was singing to herself down there loo, while waiting, and an 
attendant came in to ask her what was wrong. 
(After lunch, at 2:45 Jane put on lipstick and looked at herself in the 
mirror. She said she had some extra freedom of motion in her right thumb. 
Her temperature today was 98.3 — down again. I forgot to ask her ivhat it 
had been this morning. 
(3:36. Jane began reading yesterday's session, and doing quite well. I 
ivorked on mail. 
(3:45. Diana came in. "You're a celebrity," she said, pointing to Jane. 
Diana had found an article about Jane, with picture, in a book on the history 
of Chemung County and Elmira. We'd forgotten about it, but an older retired 
individual had contacted Jane years ago about doing such a project. Neither of 
us could remember his name. I believe someone connected with the Star-Gazette. 
(3:56. Jane resumed reading the session, did well, and finished at 
4:10. She had another cigarette luhile I did mail. She suggested having a 
short session ivhen the hour began to grow late.) 
Now I bid you another fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
Comments. 
There is one other point in particular I wanted to mention, 
though it has, of course, been discussed often before. This is the 
matter of self-approval. 
BIOLOGICALLY VALID THOUGHTS 
• 101 • 
Many of the contradictory beliefs and negative ones discussed in 
yesterday's session led to strong feelings of self-disapproval. The 
beliefs were so contradictory that in living up to any one of them you 
actually seemed to be denying others in which you also believed. 
Hence, no matter what you did you were both left with strong feelings of self-disapproval. 
You are largely over that kind of reaction — yet it is still apt 
to return now and then when you fear that you have not done as 
well as you should have, or when you have momentarily caught yourself behaving in old ways. A feeling of self-approval is absolutely 
necessary for any true sense of well-being; it is not (underlined) 
virtuous in any way to put yourself down, or to punish yourself, 
because you do not feel you have lived up to your best behavior at 
any given time. 
Do keep an eye out for that kind of reaction, however, so that you 
can nip it in the bud. 
Tell Ruburt that the same energy that healed or mended his 
right knee can also straighten it out. The mental exercises he has 
been doing are excellent in that regard. Do not worry about the 
insurance situation. It is being solved, and to your advantage. 
As much as possible, playfully (underlined twice) imagine your 
worries floating away. It might help if you imagine balloons, one 
labeled insurance, another health, and so forth — then imagine 
them floating away, or popping open, or whatever. Again, this should 
be playfully done. You might surprise yourself, and find yourself as 
delighted as a child with a new game. 
I may or may not return again et cetera, but I do activate those 
coordinates that quicken Ruburt's healing processes. 
("It's me,"Jane said after a pause. 
("Thank you. * 
(4:45 P.M. Iforgot to tell Jane about a dream I had last night. Not very 
elaborate: Td dreamed that Td been visiting some friends, a married couple, 
I believe, and that they had a number of cats of their oivn in the place. Our 
Billy was there also. When it came time for me to leave, I started hunting 
around to find Billy. Each time I picked up a cat, I discovered that I didn 9t 
have Billy. All of the cats were marked more or less similarly, yet there ivere 
enough differences in color and pattern so that I could know Billy ivhen 
and if I found him.) 
• D<± • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
FEBRUARY 7,1984 
4:04 P.M. TUESDAY 
(Jane called last night Today was cold — 22 degrees when I left for 
330. I stopped at the bank to buy money orders to pay bills. No one had 
taken Jane's temperature this morning; since it had dropped back to normal 
range. After lunch Jane told me that Steve and Tracy had sent her a 
telegram Sunday night, saying they couldn't make it for a variety of reasons. She'd forgotten to tell me. 
(A note: This is "Day 6" of Jane's new campaign to change her thinking. 
(3:02. After lunch Jane began to read yesterday's session, and did quite 
well. I answered mail. Jane remembered the name of the retired newspaperman who'd -written about us in his history of Chemung County — 
"Burs. "And this triggered my own memory: Tom Byrne. 
(3:15. Jane finished reading the session, and had done quite well. A t 
3:55 a student took her blood pressure, which was good. Jane was ready for 
the session early. She decided not to wait for temperature. 
(The room had been ivarm, and 1 had the heat off and the window wide open. 
Traffic noise was a bother at times — and that effect reminded me of how often 
such racket had been a problem when we held sessions at 458 W. Water Street.) 
Now I bid you another fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
Book dictation. (Long pause, then quite sloivly:) All creatures are 
also born, then, with a keen sense of self-approval. 
Each creature is born proud of itself, and loving itself. That same 
self-approval is also experienced in varying ways not only by creatures as you think of them, but also by atoms and molecules, and by 
all orders of matter. 
Ruburt once wrote a poem about a nail on a window sill. He 
endowed the nail with consciousness and self-awareness. Now every 
nail is indeed in its own way responsive to stimuli. It acts and reacts. 
A nail may not choose to jump down from a window still and dance 
about the room, but a nail is indeed aware of the room, of the 
window sill, and aware of the temperature on both sides of the 
window. The atoms and molecules that compose the nail possess 
their own lively consciousnesses. Their motion is directed by electrons, so that within itself the nail actually experiences constant 
motion. Indeed, a dance is executed of great symmetry and rhythm. 
The nail, then, is indeed filled with its own sense of self-approval. 
BIOLOGICALLY VALID THOUGHTS 
• 101 • 
I am mentioning this only to stress the fact that self-delight and 
self-approval (longpause) are natural characteristics — characteristics 
that actually make your entire physical world, and world of experience, possible. 
It is very unfortunate, therefore, when adults inadvertently 
undermine a child's sense of self-approval. A small boy might be 
caught in a lie, for example, and therefore labeled by an adult in the 
angriest of terms as a liar. Instead, a distinction should be made: the 
child made an error — he lied — but he himself is not the error QT 
the lie. He can then determine to change his behavior while still 
saving his self-respect. 
(Long pause at 4:16.) All creamres are basically of good intent; 
even when they commit the most dubious of acts, these are usually 
caused by a misdirected good intent. Actually, many criminals are 
motivated by distorted versions of righteousness. We will have more 
to say about this later in the book, but for now I want to stress the 
importance of self-approval in connection with exuberance, health, 
and well-being. 
End of dictation. I may or may not return, again according to those 
rhythms of which I speak, et cetera, but I do indeed accelerate those 
coordinates that quicken Ruburt's healing processes. I remind you 
also to read the session of the day before yesterday whenever possible. 
("It's me,"Jane said after a pause. 
("Thank you." 
(4:21 P.M.Jane told me that yesterday Mary Jean, who had changed her 
dressings, had remarked upon how well the remaining bedsores are healing. 
(4:45. Dorothy took Jane's temperature— 99.3. After she left Jane 
said, "See, instead of trusting my body I'm mad because my temperature is 
up again like 
that..." 
(She didn't read over the session from the day before yesterday. I'd read 
it this morning at the house.) 
FEBRUARY 8,1984 
4:24 RM. WEDNESDAY 
(I worked on Dreams this morning. The day ivas cold — about 22 — 
when I left for 330 at 12:30. I'd just turned Jane when the phone rang. It 
was someone called Danny Olson, from a small town in Missouri. He'd 
• D<± • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
sent some home-canned jars of fruits and vegetables at Christmas time; for 
the past year he'd also written a string of long letters signed "me," meaning 
I couldn 'I answer him to say thanks for the stuff He'd done the same thing 
the Christmas before last, also. 
(With an early letter he'd sent some photos of himself and asked that 
they be returned. I did so. After that he quit adding his address to his letters. 
In the meantime I'd put his address downstairs in storage among many 
others, and hadn't taken the time to find it so I could answer — another of 
the mail hassles that crop up often. 
(Today he told me that he'd found outJane was in a hospitalfrom someone he writes to in one of the Carolinas, so he called our area hospitals until 
he learned which one Jane was in. A simple procedure, and one I hope others 
don't pick up from him. I don't think he'll call back, though he may. We 
ended up in a rather acrimonious conversation in which I hoped I'd alienated him enough so he'd not bother my wife or me. 
(He had lots of energy, ivhich I could sense, but seemed to me to be 
contradictory in many ways, and I took him up on several points. He 
seemed to be so taken with the Seth material that he'd stopped reading everything else, he said, yet when I said he shouldn't do that, he said he read 
widely of other material — that sort of thing. I could tell he didn't understand that to be a creative leader one didn't follow others, but went out on 
his own. I knew as we talked that his flattering opinion of me, at least, was 
being shattered. 
(I also ended up with familiar feelings — to the effect that it's impossible forJane and I to ever live up to the fantasy pictures others may build up 
of us. I'm quite aware of the contradictions in our own behavior, too, as I 
told Jane after the half-hour conversation was over: We put our work out 
into the arena where it's available to anyone, and hope they'll pay attention 
to it. Then when they do, sometimes it turns us o f f . 
(People's reactions are too varied, I've learned, for us to expect them to 
behave as we want them to. We must be afraid of that. But I wasn't pleased 
when Danny exclaimed, "Damn you, Rob, I want you to be as open with me 
as I am with you. "He quite forgot that he shouldn't project his ownfeelings 
upon someone else who could be quite different. It made me wonder, as I 
drove home, what some people did before they came across the Seth material, 
or my own thinking. Who did they emulate then — how did they fill their 
lives, with ivhat heroes and heroines? One thing is certain: They didn't 
BIOLOGICALLY VALID THOUGHTS 
• 101 • 
write books or develop an original philosophy of their own. They're quite 
content to leap upon the work of others, and to get mad at them because 
they — meaning Jane and me — don't react the way we're supposed to. 
They also forget, or don't understand, that being the way we are led to the 
creation of our work. If we were different people, the work would be different — or might not exist at all. 
(I also thought the call might force a change in ivhat I tell correspondents — but then, with the information about us that I furnished for 
Maude Cardwell's article in Reality Change, what would be the point of 
changing my response to the mail? We have few secrets left. It's apparent 
tha t the idea of people giving us money may have a negative side. Bu t I 
can't say that I didn't know that. 
(While I was on the phone an a ttendan t brough t us a letter from Sue 
Watkins. When I opened it I found a check for $1,000 made out by Helen 
Granger Park. "What's Miss Bowman sending us money for?" I asked Jane. 
I was momentarily confused — for my art teacher in high school in Sayre, 
Pennsylvania had been Helen Bowman, until she married later in life and 
became Helen Bowman Park. I'd always called her Miss Bowman. It 
turned out that the Helen Park who had written had read Maude's article 
in Reality Change, and sent the check to Sue to forward to us, to make sure 
we'd get it safely. That Helen Park lives in Austin, Texas. I may call her 
tonight, and Sue also. I told Jane I didn't know whether to attach any significance to the two Helen Parks or not. Money was involved with both 
people, since rng Miss Bowman had lent me the money to go through art 
school in New York City. I had repaid her during my three years of military 
service during World War II. 
(At about 8:30 last night, Jane said she'd had a very vivid "experience 
that was pretty real," in which for a few seconds she found herself cavorting 
in very clear and shallow water, feeling really free and enjoying herself 
greatly. She could see the pebbles beneath the water, and so forth. She slept 
well afterward. No temperatures were taken last night or this morning. She 
went to hydro around 10:00 A.M. and was back by 11:00 for a change. 
(I should add that when I realized what the check for the $1,000 meant, 
I had strange initial feelings of guilt and of rebellion, of being now in a 
pretty vulnerable position in some strange ivay, even though the money 
would help with hospital charges. I also thought that although Helen Park 
said in her letter that there were no strings attached to the donation, still 
• D<± • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
there must be attachments in some form — that it was natural that there 
would be. The only way out of that situation that I thought of at the 
moment was that the giving of the gift, and the personal contact it meant, 
constituted the attachment. 1 now think there will be a variety of strings, 
in some farm or another, and I don't mean to be cynical in making this 
observation. 
(4:00. A new lady took Jane's blood pressure, which was normal. 
(4:05. A student took Jane's temperature — and it was up to 101. 
(Jane began reading yesterday's session at 4:06, and did so-so. I helped 
her at limes. I began sorting mail. When Jane was finally through she said 
she wanted to have a short session.) 
Now: Another fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
I am speaking to reassure Ruburt his temperature is a sign of 
healing as the body throws.off what it does not need. 
Please do lovingly remind him (Jane sneezed) to trust his body and 
its processes. You both can be of great help to each other, when one 
or the other is worried or upset. Trust in the body automatically 
quickens all healing processes, and this session can put Ruburt's 
mind at rest. He has only to take my words to heart. 
I do indeed also quicken those coordinates that so aid in those 
healing processes. I may or may not return, et cetera. 
("Okay. Thank you." 
(4:27 P.M. Jane seemed to feel belter for having the session. 
(I was just getting ready to leave for the day when Shawn Peterson visited. She is much better, and is going home tomorrow. She seems to have no 
heart trouble, but must wear a harness at home for 24 hours, to detect any 
heart abnormalities — a monitoring device that, I believe, somehow records 
electrical heart activity. 
(I went food shopping at SuperDuper, ate a later supper than usual, 
and called Helen Park in Austin. She answered on the second ring, and we 
had a fine talk. She was surprised to hear from me, and I thanked her for 
her contribution. The connection was rather faint, but clear enough. 
(Then I called Sue in Dundee to thank her for forwarding the check, 
and we talked for at least half an hour. The upshot of all of the activity is 
that 1 was late getting to the typewriter, and it's now 11:20 P.M. as I finish 
this session. Sleep well, Jane.) 
BIOLOGICALLY VALID THOUGHTS 
• 101 • 
FEBRUARY 9,1984 
4:16 P.M. THURSDAY 
(Debbie Harris visited Jane last night. Jane didn't feel well while Debbie 
was there. An aide took Jane's temperature during the visit, and it was 
normal at 8:30. My wife's temperature was checked again around 
11:00 P.M. and it was 101. The next time, after 3:00 A.M., it was 102. 
But after breakfast this morningjane's temperature was down to 95.5. This 
ivas after she'cl been given a pill to lower her temperature artificially. I do 
not know the name of the medication. 
(Jane threw up mucous at least three times during the night. She did so 
while on her side, and couldn't get help when she pressed the call button. 
The staff people had to change all of her bedding in the middle of the night. 
Jane had to yell for help. She didn't get her lower teeth back afterward 
because they'd become messed up, she said. 
("But Seth ivas right," she told me. "The body was trying to get rid of 
things — the mucous — that it didn't want." She sounded weaker than 
usual. Also during the night, herfeet began to turn a mottled red color, reminiscent of the way they used to be when she'd had much swelling in them. 
Only now there was no swelling. The reddish clots looked like circulatory 
changes. I noticed them as soon as I entered 330. Jane said they didn't hurt, 
except that her righ t heel in back, and the inside of her righ t ankle, bothered 
her a little. 
(This morning in hydro the sole of her right foot had stung in the same 
manner. She drank iced ginger ale all through the night, and decided to 
stop doing that today and switch to plain cool water. No one knows why the 
feet turned blotchy, although I think we do. Jane said she wouldn't have 
known it had happened if others hadn't told her. 
(She had tried to call me twice last night, but her attempts had been 
made while I toas talking to Helen Park and Sue Watkins, evidently. As she 
ate a light lunch I told her that our lawyer's assistant had called this morning, and that I stopped on my way down to pick up our tax forms. Incredibly, we owe money on taxes this year — $26,000 in medical expenses 
notwithstanding. I can 'I believe it, I told Jane. I'm in no hurry to pay the 
bill, now that we owe money instead of getting a refund. I'd hoped we'd 
break even at least. 
(3:00. Jane put on the neiv lipstick I'd bought her a couple days ago, 
then looked in the mirror. 
• D<± • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
(3:25. She explained that her right foot was bothering her a bit This is 
when she remembered having the same feelings in hydro this morning. I did 
some mail. The mail is threatening to get the best of me again. 
(3:30. Jane began reading yesterday's session — and did very well. She 
was through by 3:45, zipping right through the session. "I'd say my eyes are 
better than the best they ve been so far, Bob," she said — which really surprised me. Far although she'd done well, I hadn't realized the extent of her 
improvement Excellent 
(3:50. Staff began coming in to check Jane's vitals. Fd done her eyedrops an hour ago. Jane's blood pressure was normal, her temperature was 
97, pulse good. She let me know when she was ready for the session. This is 
Day 8 of her new regime. Fler voice wasn't as strong ivhen she spoke for Seth, 
and in the beginning she'd utter a couple of words at a time and then pause 
noticeably. This effect largely disappeared as the session progressed.) 
Now I bid you another fpnd good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
The high temperature was indeed flushing out the entire circulatory system. 
It also helped rid the body of excess fluids — the phlegm, and so 
forth. (Longpause.) The fever itself broke in the middle of the night. 
Ruburt did well with his attitude — especially since the hospital help 
are so prone themselves to negative suggestion. The high temperature was also the result of stoking the body's furnace, so to speak — 
and, again, getting rid of any leftover "poisons." Period. 
The changes in the feet show the varieties of the circulatory 
system — an unevenness of circulatory flow as the system clears itself 
out. The improvements in the eyes today were partially the result of 
those processes, as the sinuses and so forth were flushed out, relieving the eye muscles, and also ridding the areas of some excess fluid. 
The process of clearing the body out began when Ruburt started 
his Day 1, but with the great frequency of negative hospital suggestions, and general false beliefs connected with fever, the beneficial 
aspects indeed had to be taken on faith as largely (underlined) they 
were (louder). 
The improvements shown by the eyes, therefore, will be demonstrated by other portions of the body. I may or may not return, et 
cetera — but I do again quicken those coordinates that hasten physical healing. 
BIOLOGICALLY VALID THOUGHTS 
• 101 • 
("Thankyou." 
(4:26 P.M. I got Jane some cool water. "Gee, that was good —just cold 
enough . . ." She's sipped at liquids all day. Small ivoncler that her body 
needs them, after the fever, and so forth. For several days just past, her 
sinuses have been full, causing her to sniffle and blow her nose often. 
(4:32. Jane was ready to be turned early — most unusual. She wanted 
her right foot massaged with Oil of Olay. By 5:001 began my nap — but 
Jeff Karcler and a nurse came in ten minutes later. Jeff wanted to run a 
blood test tomorroxo — "I'm not sure of the cause of the fever,: We'll watch 
those feet." I told him the blotchiness had lightened since Fd been there 
today. Jeff didn 'I want Jane to get dehydrated. He seemed generally satisfied, 
although he said Jane's urine ivas "too concentrated." I asked him to see if 
the latest brand of liquid vitamins my wife is taking could be switched back 
to her old one, for she dislikes the new ones intensely. He said he'd try. 
(Jane didn't eat much supper. She asked me to lake some of it home so 
no one could tell she hadn't eaten much, but I tolcl her no one checks the 
trays; there are no names on them, for one thing. I did bring home some 
goodies for Billy and Mitzi. Mitzi is going through one of her affectionate 
stages these days.) 
FEBRUARY 10,1984 
4:12 P.M. FRIDAY 
(This is Day 9 of Jane's new regime. 
(When I drove up Coleman Avenue to the hill house last night, I became 
aware of a strange vibrating, shuddering noise in the car's underbody. It 
was more prominent in reverse gear by far. I thought it might be ice, and 
could see nothing wrong. 
(In the maillfound 
a letter from Maude Cardwell — and checks totaling about $1100, to my considerable surprise. I called the two people whose 
phone numbers were on their checks — one of them had donated $1000. 
Both ivere quite surprised to hear from me, and I felt good talking to them 
and saying thanks. 
(This morning after breakfast I took the car to Ron Traver's service station — but the noise, which I'd heard when I started it up — had disappeared by then. Ron and 1 could find nothing wrong. In fact, the car seemed 
to run better than ever. He told me to keep in touch if anything went wrong. 
It was, I hoped, one less hassle. 
• D<± • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
(Jane's temperature went back up last night: 101 around 10:30 P.M., 
and the same at about 3:00 A.M. She had blood taken before breakfast — 
we have no results. /I sample of urine was also collected. While Jane was 
eating a light lunch Lynn came in to start procedures for collecting another 
urine sample. It would be cultured — for what, we don't know. 
(Then, while she was still eating, two lab technicians came in to take 
mare blood from Jane — this was for a culture that would be grown for a 
week, they said. They said the doctor had ordered the tests — we thought 
they mean t Jeff Karder. 
(Jane was actually a little chilly at times, and asked me to turn up the 
heat, which was working fine. Her blotchy feet looked much improved, I saw 
as soon as I got there. She said Jeff had been in that morning, and saw that 
her feet were better, "Your temperature is up," he told her. "We'll have to 
watch that." 
(Jane said she'd "slept terrifically last night. "She wasn't worried about 
her temperature, especially after yesterday's session. She did her own thing 
about creating her own reality. She got down to hydro at a decent time this 
morning, and toas back by 11:00. Georgia Cecce visited briefly this morning, looking good. No ivorkfor at least a couple of mon ths. A nurse came in 
to tell us the staff is having its Valentine's Day party next Tuesday noon, 
and for me not to eat lunch at the house. 
(3:09. Jane began reading yesterday's session. She had a lot of 
trouble — perhaps caused by the increase in temperature affecting the 
sinuses, which in turn affected the eyes again ? She dicl so poorly that she 
quit reading at 3:13, as I worked on mail. When Judy brought ginger ale 
Jane decided to quit drinking carbonated liquids. She has taken in considerably more liquid, yesterday and today, and the urine looked much better as 
a result, staff said. 
(Then came the blows. At 3:20 a nurse came in to put a heparin lock 
in Jane's right forearm. The lock is a stable opening in a vein for medication: Jane was to go on antibiotics. No sooner did we find that out than one 
of the two aides returned to take more blood — they "want all they can get," 
Jane swore. The aide apologized. "I'd refuse to take the antibiotic, "Jane 
said, "if it wouldn't raise such a fuss." I didn't know how to respond. It 
seemed that once again the body's natural defense mechanisms were being 
interfered with, according to Seth — but then, why were we here to begin 
with? I didn't want to think about it. uI trust my body a hell of a lot more 
BIOLOGICALLY VALID THOUGHTS 
• 101 • 
than I do that antibiotic,"Jane said. Judy came in and told us Jeff hadn't 
ordered the antibiotic — his loife, Olivia, who is also a doctor, had. 
(3:36. After the nurse had inserted the heparin lock, Jane ivent back to 
reading the session. She did considerably better as we waited for the antibiotic. I felt discouraged. Her head was stuffy again. 
(3:50. Judy came in to take the urine sample. It's to be cultured like the 
last blood sample. Jane finished the session at 3:55. She had a smoke. 
"Then if nobody comes in, I'll start the session anyway. I suppose they 'U 
want to take my temperature and blood pressure all over again, too.") 
Now— 
(4:12. No sooner had Jane spoken Seth's greeting than a student nurse 
came in to take her temperature, at 101.2. "Shit, "Jane said. Dorothy came 
in to take her blood pressure and pulse. We might as toell start over, "Jane 
said after they'd left by 4:18.) 
Now: I bid you again a most fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
— and I am speaking simply to reassure you both. 
The body is indeed clearing itself out, stoking its furnaces — an 
idea quite foreign to the medical establishment. 
Their answer, of covirse, is antibiotics. As long as Ruburt's attitude is good the antibiotics will do no harm, and will provide an 
explanation as the conditions are cleared. It is, of course, unfortunate that Ruburt is in that environment, but these are definitely indications of the body's own healing processes. It will help you both to 
reread the passages for Day 1 or Day 2, so that you can remind yourselves of those vital issiies. 
I have again adjusted those coordinates that quicken the healing 
processes. Remember that the body is a natural self-healer. 
Now I may or may not return, et cetera — but whether or not I 
do, I am in my fashion "in the vicinity." 
("Thank you." 
(4:38. Jane was ready for me to turn her on her side by then. By 4:53 
I'd just finished massaging her with Oil of Olay when Linda, the RN, came 
in with the antibiotic. She said it was "a broad spectrum drug" that could 
kill many germs. Gentamicin 60 mg. in 50 ml NS. She said it would take 
Jane perhaps half an hour to take it all in, and that afterward Jane would 
be given a small amount of heparin, which would keep the lock open for 
• D<± • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
future doses. Jane is to get the drug every eight hours. She swore again. "But 
you ve got a fever," Linda said gently. She agreed that some people are allergic to the medication — "there are always side effects. " 
(5:05. The tray for supper came as I started my nap. When I got up at 
5:40 Jane had absorbed all the an tibiotic. Linda came in just as I was on 
my feet, and helped me haul Jane toward the head of the bed after I'd turned 
her on her back. Jane showed no reactions to the drug. 
(Jane called at about 9:20, with Carta's help. Her temperature had 
been taken again after I left — 100.1, or something like that — she saicl it 
was down "a few points" from earlier in the day. She sounded good.) 
FEBRUARY 11,1984 
4:23 RM. SATURDAY 
(The day ivas very warm — 45 — as I left for 330. The car worked 
fine. Jane was upset ivhen I got there — although her blotchy feet looked 
much better. The dark reddish patches are much less extensive. She didn't go 
to hydro this morning — with her fever, Jeff didn't want her to go. She 
hadn 7 slept well last night, and staff had been too busy to help her turn 
often enough. Yet Jane doesn't know whether she received a dose of the 
antibiotic during the night ivhile she may have slept. 
(Last night, she estimated, her temperature had been 101 at 8:00, 101 
at 11:00, and 101 at 3:00 A.M. At breakfast time it had been 99.3. After 
lunch it was 102.1. uNot bad," the male aide ivho took it said. 
(I had trouble getting the above information from Jane after lunch, 
because she seemed on the verge of dozing off several times. She said she got 
mad at Jeff and Judy this morning because of their negative beliefs. Jeff saicl 
maybe the splotches on her feet were infected, and Judy saicl the drainage 
from the small ulcer on each hip had increased. Jane finally told them to cut 
it out. Jeff said he'd like to know where the fever came from. 
(2:45. Jane remembered to tell me that last night two students had 
watched as an aide checked her catheter and Foley. This in turn reminded 
her that Jeff had also said this morning that maybe she had an infection from 
the catheter, "sincepeople always do." She'd heard nurses say the same thing. 
(3:10. Judy saicl the cranberry juice mixture Jane is taking helps keep 
her urine acid rather than alkaline — why, we clon't know. 
(3:37. Lipstick and mirror. 
BIOLOGICALLY VALID THOUGHTS 
• 101 • 
(3:45. Carla took Jane's temperature. 102.4 — the highest yet. Jane 
swore again. She was worried about J e f f s reaction more than the temperature. She's been drinking a lot of juice. 
(3:50. Jane started reading yesterday's session while I did mail. She 
didn't do ivell at all. Five minutes later Leanne came in to give her some 
Ascripton, or aspirin, in ice cream,, for the fever. Then she hooked Jane up to 
a new bag of Gentamicin 40 mg., the antibiotic. It should be absorbed in half 
an hour, as usual. Jane went back to reading the session — still not good. 
(4:15.1 finished reading yesterday's session to Jane.) 
I bid you another fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
— and I can really only restate yesterday's session. 
(Longpause.) Ruburt is in no danger. (Pause.) We can use the situation, however, as an educational tool, so that he does indeed rise 
victoriously from these unfortunate medical beliefs. 
Once again, it is perfectly natural for each cell in the body, for 
each organ and each portion of the body to heal itself, and in the 
same terms it is really "unnatural" noI to trust the body, rather than 
looking at it with suspicion. In any case — 
(4:27. Leanne swept in. The antibiotic was all taken in by Jane; I'd 
seen it still dripping a few minutes ago. She left to get the heparin to inject 
into the lock on Jane's wrist.) 
— In any case, it is of course important for Ruburt to keep his 
mind as relieved as possible. That alone relaxes all other parts of 
the body, and lets the healing processes operate more easily and 
efficiently. 
Now I may or may not rettirn, but I will indeed keep Ruburt in 
the eye of my attention, and you also. 
("Okay. Thank you." 
(4:33 P.M. I read the session to Jane. She had a smoke. It wasn't until 
I was home tonight that I realized that after massaging her I'd forgotten to 
exercise her right leg as she lay on her side. I'm up to moving it back and 
forth 250 times, and it does better and better. 
(Carla and a studen t and Dorothy came in to turn Jane before I could 
read her the prayer, so I left at 7:00. 
(I coulcln't help noticing as I walked down the hall on my way out, how 
busy all the patient rooms were, the cacophony of sounds, the numerous 
• D<± • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
visitors, patients and nurses and aides. I might as well be downtown on a 
busy street, I thought. The hall was a community in itself, accepted by all) 
FEBRUARY 12,1984 
4:28 RM. SUNDAY 
(When Jane called last night she said her temperature had dropped to 
99.7— breaking the 100-degree barrier. Today was warm again — 42 
degrees — when I left for 330. Jane's feet looked much better, She didn't go 
to hydro. She said that after I left last night she resolved to do what Seth had 
said, no matter what. Then Debbie Harris had visited. After that, Leanne 
said my wife's urine looked much better than it has been. Jane has been 
drinking considerably more. 
(Jane slept very well, and at 5:30 A.M. her temperature was 98. 
(She had blood taken again before breakfast, from her left foot. Mare 
was taken after breakfast. Her temperature at 11:00 A.M. was 97.8. I 
found that Jane's menu for tomorrow was marked "Calorie Count" for each 
meal. This means I won't get to save them, since I have to estimate how 
much of each food she eats so dietary can figure the calories involved. Jane 
didn't eat a lot of lunch. 
(2:15. She tried to read yesterday's session, but couldn't at all. She laid 
it aside as Judy came in to hook her up to another medicine bag. There was 
some confusion, since Judy told us it was the same medication — Gentamicin — that she'd been getting, only it was in 100 cc's of liquid instead of 
50. Yet after she left I discovered a different name on the plastic bag: 
(Septra) Bactrim. 
(2:45. Jane tried again to read the session, but couldn't. At 3:10 I 
started to read it to her when Mary Jean came in to check the flow of the 
antibiotic. It turned out Jane was being given a second medication without 
being told. This was an antibiotic for a bladder infection. Mary Jean said 
Jeff must have seen something on the report of her urinalysis this morning 
and ordered the Bactrim, which is quite powerful. Jane was mad. "I want 
to make a formal protest for the record," she told Mary Jean, "that I wasn't 
notified about this." Mary Jean said she'd relay it to the head nurse — 
where I suppose it'll die. It lakes an hour for this second dose to flow into 
Jane's body, compared to the one-half hour for the Genlamicin. 
(3:20.1 read yesterday's session to Jane, and started mail. 
BIOLOGICALLY VALID THOUGHTS 
• 101 • 
(3:30. Carla took Jane's temperature — it was up again to 101.2. 
Judy came in to check thefloiu, and said Jane was to get the Bactrim every 
six hours, or four times a day. With the Gentamicin every eight hours, this 
makes seven medications Jane gets every 24 hours. Jane has let everyone 
know she's pissed o f f . What's happened? "It would be nice to know," I said 
when she expressed concern, and she replied that she was doing all she 
could. I had the feeling of being caught in a whirlpool of the medical 
profession's making, and being drawn in deeper instead of being able to 
extricate oneself. I wondered why the body couldn't heal itself except through 
fevers and infections. "Well, that's it, then," I said, and went back to the 
mail until Jane said she was ready for a session.) 
Now, I wish you another most fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
The bacteria is naturally found in every bladder — but when you 
collect it or isolate it. the doctors then call it infected. 
I repeat, Ruburt is in no danger, but I would also like some of the 
late sessions reviewed as reinforcement. Once more I adjust those 
coordinates that quicken Ruburt's healing powers, and both of you 
rest in my attention. 
It is, again, vital that you trust the body, particularity in the 
light of the medical profession's suspicions of the body's natural 
processes. 
I may or may not return, et cetera, and a fond early good evening. 
("Thank you." 
(4:32 P.M. I read the session to Jane. After I'd turned her on her side at 
4:40, Leanne came in to hook up Jane to her next dose of Gentamicin. 
(I was getting ready to leave at 6:50, after turning and feeding Jane, 
and so forth, when I discovered I couldn't find my glasses. I don't wear 
them too much any more, but thought I'd had them on at least once during 
the afternoon. Otherwise, I'd left them home — something I've never done 
before. I finally found the glasses in the bathroom. After reading the prayer 
with Jane, I left at 7:25. It was still warm and pleasan t. There was fog on 
the way up Coleman Avenue toward the hill house. 
(Before leaving I rubbed the sole of Jane's right foot, which has been 
itching a lot. As I did so her left foot moved in rhythm — and she said she's 
noticed more movement in it lately. But she hasn't clone any motions of note 
in a long time now.) 
• 125 
• 
TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
FEBRUARY 13,1984 
MONDAY 
(Day 12 of Jane's new regime. 
(Jane called last night 
(I made two useless trips today. Because it's a holiday, I guess, the bank 
was closed, so I couldn 't pay the IRS. 
(My dentist wasn 'I there even though I had an appointment for today 
that had been given me three or four months ago. I left at 1:20, after leaving a note on his desk at the office. 
(I got to 330 late. Jane was on her side. Suzanne helped me hoist her up 
on the bed. She ale a little better than yesterday. I marked the menu for calorie 
count 
(Jeff was in — saicl results of all of the tests showed a blood infection. 
That there's no doubt they can clear it up. They're trying out two medications — Gentamicin and Bactrim — to see ivhich will do the job best 
[Though how they can know is beyond me.] 
(Peggy Gallagher visited during lunch. After lunch I read yesterday's 
session to Jane, which she couldn't do. 
(Lipstick and mirror. Mail. Letter from Danny Olson. Threw it away as 
insulting. 
(4:00 — Dana. Blood pressure and pulse. 
(4:25 — Carla. Temperature 98.7. Medication still dripping. 
(4:35 — I pressed the button for aide. Medicine done. 
(4:50-5:15 — Turn, massage, tray. 
(5:15-5:45 
—Nap. 
(6:00 — Supper. 
(6:20 — Cigarette. Dessert Teeth. 
(7:05 — Cigarette. TV. 
(7:13 — Prayer. 
(7:20 — Leave.) 
FEBRUARY 14,1984 
4:32 P.M. TUESDAY 
(This is Day 13 of Jane's new campaign. 
(Jane called last night. The day was again very warm — over 50 — 
ivhen I left for 330. The snow and ice are gone. I slopped at the bank to buy 
a check for the IRS and money orders to pay bills. This morning I'd written 
BIOLOGICALLY VALID THOUGHTS 
• 101 • 
two letters to people who had sent ns donations, I told Jane. 1 plan to open 
the account for those checks later this week. 
(I also told Jane tha t in a ba tch of fan mail tha t had been temporarily 
lost, I found a note from my dentist's secretary and nurse, Babs, changing 
the date of my appoin tmen t from Feb. 13 to the 23rd. Pel sat alone in the 
office yesterday, the dale of my original appointment, with no one ever showing up. I wrote the dentist a note and left it on his desk. 
(I do have a thing going with dentists. I told Jane that if she'd had her 
regular session yesterday in 330, so that I was busy typing it last night, I 
wouldn't have found Babs's note, because I wouldn't have had the extra 
time after supper to go through fan mail, clean out the paper bag I carry to 
the hospital each day, and so on. So, why did she not have a session yesterday, the day of my dental appointment? It's the first one Jane has missed in 
weeks, literally. 
(Today I called Babs from the hospital and verified the new appointment. This experience follows, of course, the one I had for my last appointment, and which is on record — when I chipped a tooth and went to my 
dentist's office the same day to see if he could fix it — and discovered that I 
had an appointment I'd forgotten about for that very same time on that same 
day. When I walked in Babs thought I was keeping that appointment. . . 
(Jane went to hydro this morning. Her temperature is in the normal 
range, and her menu is no longer marked for calorie count. She did not see 
Jeff this morning. She is still on the two antibiotics, Gentamicin and 
Bactrim. Her blotchy feet are even more improved — remarkably so, I told 
her. [She can't see them.] 
(Jane didn't eat a whole lot of lunch. Afterward I gave her a Valentine's 
Day card, and a box of candy shaped like a heart. I hadn't eaten lunch today 
because a nurse had said to eat there at 330, since staff was having a party. 
No one showed up with food for me, though, so I ate what Jane didn't ivant 
off the tray — half a roast-beef sandwich, with mustard. Very good. 
(Since she had no session from yesterday to read, Jane tried to read the 
session for February 1 — the one that led to her Day 1, 2, 3 program. She 
couldn't manage it, though, so I read it to her: "Health is simplicity itself." 
An excellent session. Then I read her the session for February 5 — equally 
good. They helped her. Jane seldom asks to read past sessions — behavior 
that is still protective, I think, and has been for many years. This, even 
though Seth has lately again suggested she reread certain material. To me 
this situa tion has always been a clear demonstra tion tha t one part of herself 
• 114 • 
TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
is still in opposition to another part, and that the fearful self is still dominant though perhaps to a somewhat lesser degree these days, for we have 
made progress. 
(Jane's temperature was normal — 98.3, at 3:45. Frank Longwell visited. I tried to do some mail, but didn 7 get far. Because of the warm weather, 
the window of330 was open a foot, and the heat was o f f . Once again, when 
Jane had the session I became aware of traffic noise from Market Street.) 
Now: another fond good evening. 
("Good evening, Seth.") 
Ruburt needed to hear the precise material that you read to him 
today. 
(Long pause.) The ideas are so very beneficial that it is too bad 
you cannot have some kind of schedtile that includes reading that 
material more often. 
("He seldom asks me to read it to him.") 
That is simply because everything is now scheduled in a fashion, 
with the time available. That material, however, is "excellent medicine," and can indeed be life-saving (intently). It is indeed unfortunate 
that those beliefs that show themselves so simply and effectively in 
nature seem so mysterious to the usvial line of official consciousness. 
The official line does have its role, of course — but once again, 
by itself it must remain isolated from the deep, creative, healing 
functions of body consciousness. The official line of consciousness is 
really the "worrier," because it recognizes that it can only go so far, 
and usually it is not educated enough to realize it is itself sustained 
and supported — and now I bid you a fond good afternoon, and I 
do indeed adjust those coordinates that do quicken Ruburt's healing 
processes. 
(To me:) You are in my attention also, of course, and these late 
sessions should also help you tone up your own body, and revive feelings of exuberance and understanding. 
("Can I ask you a question V9) 
You may. 
("Just what do you mean when you say that you "adjust those coordinates that quicken Ruburt 9s healing processes?99 
(Slowly at 4:44.) Give us a moment... When I am "present," this 
also places Ruburt within a different kind of framework in relation 
BIOLOGICALLY VALID THOUGHTS 
• 101 • 
to himself, in which most negativity simply takes no hold. It is as if 
you set up a small healing station, or platform and from that vantage 
point the body is then able to use its healing abilities far more effectively than usual. 
Now I may or may not return, et cetera . . . 
("It's me,"Jane said. 
(4:47 p.m. Jane only vaguely remembered Seth s answer to my question. 
I'd thought of asking it before, and should have. "I was going to ask 
another one, but you came out of it too quickly," I said. I read the session to 
her. Then I explained that my next question was simply whether she could 
place herself in that state with Seth present, even though I wasn't there and 
Seth didn 7 speak. "If you can do it once a day, why not twice — or more?" 
I asked. "Make believe I'm there in the bathroom, just out of sight, or out in 
the hall." I hoped this might help accelerate her healing even more. Jane 
agreed to try it. 
("I can 't believe that we can'tfind ten minutes a day to go over that session for February 1,991 said, "even if we have to give up watching some TV. 
Especially when we've seen the program before." We can hardly let a "schedule" interfere with such important activity. And once again Ifelt that it was 
up to me to take the initiative in such matters. 
(Jane said I could ask Seth my second question tomorrow.) 
FEBRUARY 15,1984 
4:32 P.M.WEDNESDAY 
(There was some water in the cellar last night from the steady downpour 
of yesterday. I mopped some of it before the old mop went to pieces, so I must 
buy a new one. It rained part of the night, and a bit more this morning. It 
was very warm again — 42 degrees — as I left for 330. 
(Jane had more blood taken this morning, during breakfast. She slept 
well and went to hydro. Her temperature is normal, and she's down to the 
one antibiotic, Bactrim. She ate a fair lunch. Rita brought in some potassium and vitamin C that Jeff wants my wife to take, evidently as the result 
of a test. Rita crushed it and Jane tried it with Hawaiian Punch, which she 
didn't like. 
(After her lunch I read to Jane the same two sessions I'd read her yesterday —for February 1 and 5. I told her that my question for Seth is, why 
• 116TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
did the fever business start after her initiation ofDay 1 of her new program ? 
There must be many connections. 
(Jane tried to read yesterday's session, but couldn 't do it very well, so she 
laid it aside for a smoke. She showed how she had considerably more motion 
in her entire left arm and hand, especially at the elbow. She's mentioned 
changes in the hands several limes lately. Then she showed how she also 
had more motion in the right hand and forearm. Herfeel, both of them, also 
moved, and felt freer, she said. The splotches on her feet are again much 
improved. It appears that her body generally is showing signs of more 
changes, as though it's getting ready for them. Seth has forecast this. Jane 
hasn't moved much at all for a long time. I read her yesterday's session. 
(It was 4:20 before either of us realized it. I tried doing mail, luithout 
getting anywhere. At 4:30 I rang for an aide, since the medicine bag was 
empty on its pole at the head of Jane's bed. As we waited, Jane decided to go 
ahead with the session. "I'll try to keep my voice down," she saicl. The 
window had just been closed: I'd been bothered by traffic noise as I tried to 
read to her. Her Seth voice was indeed on the quiet side.) 
Now I bid you another most fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
There are styles of thinking, just as there are various styles of dress. 
The official line of consciousness is a certain mental stance, a 
kind of convention. (Long pause.) When you were a child you 
thought in a freer fashion, but little by little you were educated to use 
words in a certain way. You discovered that your needs were met 
more quickly, and you received approval more often, when you 
thought and spoke in that particular manner. Finally it seemed to be 
the only — 
(4:35. Rita came in to do something— what I don't recall, since I 
didn't note it down. I read ivhat she'd given to Jane. Resume at 4:39.) 
— natural mode of operation. Your entire civilization is built 
around that kind of inner framework. The way of thinking becomes 
so automatic as to be mentally invisible. With creative people, however, there are always intrusions, hints or clues from ways of thinking 
that certainly appear foreign, and creative people use those hints 
and clues to construct an art, a musical composition or whatever. 
They sense a surge of power beneath. 
You and Ruburt have had the feeling many times — but what 
we are trying to do is change over completely from one mode of 
BIOLOGICALLY VALID THOUGHTS 
• 101 • 
operation to another, and to construct, say, new inner blocks of 
meaning that will give rise to the next era. 
(Long pause at 4:44.) What you are involved in then is really, of 
course, a completely new educational procedure, so that you are at 
least able to distinguish one style of thought from another, and 
therefore be freer to make choices. 
I did want to give you this material, and in a fashion — 
(4:48. Carla came in with the supper tray, and we told her about the 
medicine bag being empty. I'd turned off the nurse's call light early in the 
session, hoping we wouldn't be interrupted.) 
— this will help you understand about the platform that Ruburt 
imagines, and the inner procedure required for a session without a 
session. 
Now I may or may not return, et cetera — and once again I do 
indeed adjust those coordinates that quicken the healing processes. 
("Thank you." 
(4:50 P.M. Jane said Seth "could have gone on and on." I regretted the 
lost opportunity. She said she'd tried to reach the platform Seth had 
described in the last session, and as I'd suggested she try to do, but with limited success. Yet she'd achieved something, so it was worth keeping on with 
for a while, I said. 
(I also reminded Jane that we hadn't gotten an answer from Seth to my 
question about why all the fever business started right after Jane had put 
her Day 1, 2, 3 program into effect. She said we'd try again tomorrow. I 
pressed the call button again — and Leanne came right in to unhook my 
wife, and give her a shot of heparin in her heparin lock, to keep it open for 
the next TV. 
(Jane had another excellent episode of increased motions in both arms 
and hands as I ivas getting ready to leave, and in her feet also. I encouraged her to keep it up even if she was alone, and if she called tonight, to give 
me a progress report. I love you, Jane.) 
FEBRUARY 16,1984 
4:20 P.M. THURSDAY 
(Jane clidn't call last night to give me a progress report on the neiv 
motions she was enjoying when I left yesterday. Those motions are still 
mostly with her, as she demonstrated today. She slept very well last night. 
• 118 • 
TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
(Jane had some other excellent news. The therapist in hydro this morning, who'd examined her last week, literally gasped when she examined the 
ulcer on each thigh: "I don't believe this." She told Jane the ulcers had 
diminished in size by at least half— and she went to get a measuring 
device like a micrometer to check the shrinkage. Yet another nurse had saicl 
the other day that the drainage had ivorsened, a s ta temen t Jane had taken 
exception to, as had L 
(Jane's temperature has been in the normal range. No blood was taken 
this morning. She ate a fair lunch. 
(3:30. I read yesterday's session to Jane, after she couldn't do it. My 
throat was hoarse. I'd started coughing after eating half of one of the candies I'd bought Jane for Valentine's Day. I had trouble reading. 
(3:45. Jeff Karder came in. He wants to keep her on the Bactrim for a 
couple more days. Jane had had a blood infection, now clearing up okay. 
Jeff wants her on the potassium, and vitamin C to keep her urine on the acid 
side, since this inhibits bacterial growth. 
(3:55. Jane's temperature was 98.9.1 read her the sessions for February 
1, 6, and 7. She said her eyes do bother her. They 're very red. I suggested she 
have a session soon if she was going to, regardless of xvhether her blood pressure still had to be taken. Once again the window was open and the curtains closed because of the very bright sun. This is Day 15 of her new 
campaign, and I'd already reminded her of the question we wanted Seth to 
answer: Why had this fever and infection business erupted after Day 1 ? 
(Jane's Seth voice was again on the quiet side, her delivery quite slow at 
times.) 
Now — I bid you another fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
Ruburt began the new program with a sense of determination 
and faith. 
That determination and that faith also let him see (long pause) 
how far from healthy, normal behavior he had come. Earlier, he had 
been afraid to realize that distance. This did arouse still more faith 
and determination, but he was then faced with that realization he 
had not encountered earlier, and he saw how long it had been since 
he had enjoyed anything like normal mobility. 
Those feelings did frighten him, and led to several bouts of blueness. Those bouts, however, helped rid him of buried feelings, and 
BIOLOGICALLY VALID THOUGHTS 
• 101 • 
his determination did indeed give the body's immune system a 
greater thrust. The improvements noted yesterday and today show 
the body's abilities, and demonstrate its own intent toward greater 
movement and flexibility. 
(Pause at 4:27.) In the same way, Ruburt encountered the hospital surroundings from another viewpoint, seeing how apart that environment was from a normal situation. That (underlined) frightened 
him also. 
Through all of this, however, the body is responding, and it is 
indeed quickening the healing processes. It is an excellent idea, 
again, that yovi are reviewing those sessions. 
Now I may or may not return, et cetera. 
("Can I ask you a question ?" 
(There was a long pause. Jane hesitated, and I felt that I'd caught her 
half ou t of trance. She later confirmed this — but she went back in to trance 
and answered.) 
You may. 
(I described my dream of the other day, which Fd already told Jane 
about: Fd been silling on our couch ivith Jane and our neighbor, Joe Bumbalo. Joe was living with us; the three of us were eating supper as we 
watched a program on TV. Margaret, Joe's wife, wasn't in the dream. 
Briefly, at the lime of the dream, Fd wondered if it hinted a t something happening to either of them — Joe or Margaret, that is.) 
Joe has recovered from a serious heart condition, of course — 
and if you will excuse me, that was the heart of the matter. Here you 
saw Jane, or Ruburt, as well-recovered as was Joe. It was as if you had 
taken in your neighbor Joe to serve as a case in point. Joe also survived the hospital environment. 
("Thank you." 
(4:33 P.M. "That makes that a pretty good little dream, then, "I told Jane, 
for in the dream she, too, had been fully recovered. Jane did remember my telling 
her about the dream earlier this iveek. Then she said, her voice breaking, "It 
wasn't until the other day that I really realized —felt —just hoto far I'd 
strayed from normal motion, or life, after all this time. Now I want to get back 
to it so bad. I just have to use it, instead of letting it — life — use me . . . " 
(Whereupon I reminded her that she didn't have to use anything, as per 
the session for February 1 that I'd read her today. She only had to get out of 
• 120 • 
TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
the way of her own body's natural ability to heal itself I was amazed at the 
way her body was still trying to right itself after all of these years. How cruel 
we coulcl be to ourselves, I thought, and this reminded me of my old questions about why the body consciousness itself didn't just rebel at limes and 
refuse to let itself be so beaten down by erroneous beliefs. Seth has said a little 
about this in response to a question of mine, but toe need much more. Nor 
has he ever referred to my question about whatever reincarnational influences migh t be opera ting with Jane. 
(I told Jane that now that the fever business loas on the way out, I 
expected to see her body continue its improvements, as obviously it was 
trying to clo. Her new motions were a good sign of the body 9s incredible strivings to express itself. 
(Before I turned her on her side, and then took a nap, I tried without 
success to locate my description of the dream with Jane and Joe in a previous recent session. No luck. I finally had to believe that in spite of my good 
in ten tions I'd literally forgotten to type it up. Nor had I written it up in my 
notes for the one day recently when Jane didn't have a session — the 13 th, 
I found out when I got home. 
(I read this session to Jane after supper. She then admitted that she'd 
become frightened today because she'd been coughing up mucous occasionally. And she became even more frightened after the session. I was frightened 
by her reactions — appalled that after all we were trying to do, she still 
reacted to something beneficial — the coughing — as something to be 
scared of. The implications took my breath away, and I became depressed 
with thoughts that I didn 7 see how she was ever going to make it, ever going 
to break that cycle of fearful response to the world and her place in it, her 
fear of being attacked, of life itself. I wondered what we'd been trying to do 
all of this time. 
("Can I say something?" I asked. "7 don 7 understand how you can be 
so frightened of a beneficial thing like the coughing, yet put up with the 
inability to walk all these years. The contradictions are beyond me. I don't 
care what Seth says about the extremes of poverty, say, I think your behavior 
is extreme. Within the context of our society, it's extreme . . ." 
(Now for the little dream I had ivhile napping. I told Jane about it while 
she ate supper. I dreamed that I received a call from a clerk at the bank. The 
girl told me that one of the checks I'd deposited for Jane's hospital fund 
wasn 7 for $1000, as we'd both thought — but was instead for $1 million. 
BIOLOGICALLY VALID THOUGHTS 
• 101 • 
I was totally surprised at the news. uAre you sure?" I asked. The clerk said 
she was, that we'd miscounted the zeroes before. "Hold that check," I said to 
her. uTU be down there in 20 minutes." 
(I told Jane I didn't expect that anybody was going to give us a million, 
but I did think it was a dream that meant well for our future . . .) 
FEBRUARY 17,1984 
4:05 P.M. FRIDAY 
(This is Day 16 of Jane's new campaign. 
(She didn't call last night A nurse called for her this morning, 
though — seems Jane was ou t of cigarette ligh ters, and wan ted me to bring 
some to 330. We spoke briefly. 
(I worked on answering Christmas cards for half an hour after breakfast, and will have to adopt some sort of system like that to get caught up on 
the fan mail. Although we are more than glad to get those precious letters — 
where would we be if people didn't care about what we're trying to do? — 
still answering them takes time away from Dreams. 
(Jane went to hydro this morning, and did okay. She still has the new 
motion in her arms and hands. She also said there's a new kind of motion, 
"like a ball bearing," in her left foot at the ankle, even though it may not 
look like a different movement. She's still on the Bactrim. Eyes still quite red. 
She tried to read yesterday's session, but couldn't do it. I read it to her at 
2:45, after she'd finished a good lunch. 
(3:00. After I'd finished the session, especially the last portion and my 
notes about my own reactions, which upset Jane, she told me that yesterday 
she'd actually been very blue the last hour I was there. She'd also been very 
afraid that the coughing up of mucous meant she was getting 
pneumonia — something she hadn't told me. She'd picked up the suggestion from something a nurse had said that morning. I said it wasn't what 
others said so much, as her reaction to what they said. I'd hoped we were 
past that stage. I said I'd expressed myself plainly in the session yesterday so 
she'd know how I felt. 
(Jane didn't comment today on my reference to any possible reincarnational connections with her symptoms. And the pneumonia idea was, I 
said, another example of an extreme. Yet Jane said that after I'd left last 
night her blueness had lifted almost magically, and she'd felt good and slept 
• 122 • 
TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
well I said that maybe by now she'd learned how to cut the blue periods 
shorter — a sign that we ivere learning something after all 
("I just had an ugly thought, " I saicl "That this concentration upon 
trying to avoid negative suggestions makes you even more sensitive to 
them. *Jane said she'd had the same thought at times. 
(She's been coughing a lot and blowing her nose heavily since I got to 
330 today. The room had no heat — it wasn 7 coming through the register 
for some reason. 
(3:08. Jane had a smoke while I read her the session for February 1, 
after she'd put on lipstick and looked in the mirror. Then I read her several 
other good and later sessions. Next, I described my vivid dream of last 
night: Jane and I were still driving our old yelloiv Cadillac convertible. She 
was walking normally. While we were in a local bar, two youths stole the car, 
which was parked nearby, and went for a joyride. I went outside to get the 
car to take Jane home, and found it gone. I called the police. I also found a 
young man in the bar who knew the two who had taken the car, but he was 
afraid to tell me who they were. Eventually the police found the car, abandoned some distance away, but unharmed. I was very angry about the 
whole thing and vowed to find out who had taken it. I told Jane the dream 
almost sounded like an exercise in exploring a probable reality. 
(3:47. Temperature 99.1. Jane saicl that ivas the highest it's been since 
it started going down in recent days. She was getting a bit chilly. I suggested 
she have a session if she was going to, then I could have staff call a maintenance man about the heat. Jane was still coughing and bloioing at times. 
I looked at mail but didn't accomplish anything.) 
Now: I bid you another most fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
I wanted to remind Ruburt of some material given several times 
in the past. 
When an idea for a book or a poem comes to him, he "tunes into 
it" immediately. It never occurs to him to wonder how many vowels 
or syllables, words and sentences, paragraphs or pages might be 
involved. He takes it for granted that his intent will be executed — 
(Leanne came in with a new bag of Bactrim. We asked her to call maintenance about heat. I read to Jane what she'd given so far. 
(4:11.) That is the natural, creative way to function, and it has 
provided him with many excellent books and poetry. When he is 
BIOLOGICALLY VALID THOUGHTS 
• 101 • 
writing he does not think in terms of impediments. What impediments there may be, he brushes aside. 
Now his health can be handled in the same fashion, without 
wondering how many nerves or muscles or stages must be activated, without worrying about how much time will be involved. In 
a fashion the body is a living book, being produced in every 
moment. 
Again, it may seem too simple — but by applying the same methods to the body, the body's health will be written with health and 
vitality, using blood and corpuscles, joints and ligaments and so forth 
instead of syllables, consonants, words and sentences. 
I may or may not return, again according to those rhythms of 
which I speak — but know that I am present and approachable. 
("Can I ask a question?99) 
You may. 
("What do you think of my dream yesterday afternoon, about our receiving the million dollars?99) 
You both interpreted it correctly. It simply meant that far more 
benefits are being added to your account than you imagine — 
meaning abundance, and not just in financial terms alone. 
("Yes. How about my dream of last night — about the old Cadillac 
being stolen?99) 
Take a break, and we will continue. 
(4:18. Jane had a cigarette while I read her the account of my dream 
that I'd just written for my daily notes, since she didn 9t remember the dream 
all that well. 
(4:24.) Now: The dream of the car represents beliefs that you 
had when you had the car. In a manner of speaking, those beliefs 
"took you for ajoyride" — therefore the joys represented portions of 
yourself. In the dream you are quite angry simply because those 
beliefs did, in a fashion, take the vehicle of your life out of your own 
hands, since you did not recognize those beliefs as your own in the 
past. At the end, the car or the vehicle is (underlined) returned to 
you, and the dream shows that you understand, now, the process that 
the dream outlined. 
("It's me,99Jane said. 
("Thank you,991 said to the departed Seth. 
• 124 • 
TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
(4.28 P.M. I toldJane that Seth 's analysis of the car dream was excellent. 
From its position atop the pole at the head of Jane's bed, the Bactrim still 
drips into the plastic tube, on its way into Jane's right arm. Ifelt chilly, but 
she didn't want anything over her yet. When I took my nap, she said a maintenance man came in and adjusted the thermostat, saying it would give us 
some heat, but it did no good. The problem still wasn't solved as I read the 
session to Jane after supper, nor was it solved by the lime I left at 7:10. 
(Jane can't know it yet, but in the mail tonight was another letter from 
Maude Cardwell, containing some $620 in checks for her hospital fund. I 
don't equate this figure with my dream. I think, and as Seth agreed, that the 
dream means far more than sums of money received alone. It's a very 
encouraging dream, and Fm very pleased to have had it. Not that the checks 
aren't welcome! Sleep well, Jane. I love you.) 
FEBRUARY 18,1984 
SATURDAY 
(Day 17 
(Jane called me last night —forgot to tell me Debbie FIarris visited. 
(Day warm — 50. 
(Finished typing Chapter 5 of Dreams this morning. 
(Still on Bactrim. Fleat working, but turned off Window wide open. 
Jane ate fair lunch. Feet still better. Lipstick and mirror. 
(2:49 — Jane asked to see yesterday's session, but didn't read it — I 
did. She's coughing a lot 
(3:14 — Read Jane let ters sen t by Maude Cardwell. 
(4:00 — Bactrim still dripping. 
(4:10 — Lynn, temperature — 98. 
(4:45 — Turn. Massage. 
(5:10-5:40 — Nap. Jane off Bactrim. 
(6:00 — Supper. 
(6:20 — Cigarette, Dessert More coughing and blowing. I asked if she 
had a cold — a poor suggestion — but instead of denying it, Jane saicl she 
didn't know. 
(6:45 — Cigarette, TV. 
(7:00 — Prayer. 
(7:05 — Leave. Shopping at Acme Supermarket 
BIOLOGICALLY VALID THOUGHTS 
• 101 • 
FEBRUARY 19,1984 
4:23 P.M. SUNDAY 
(Jane called last night. She said she'd dozed through most of her 
evening TV programs — something she hardly ever does. The day was 
again warm — 44 degrees — ivhen I went to 330. She had the heat off in 
her room. Her coughing is better today. She saicl her "eyes are terrible," 
though the redness is largely gone. Her feet look much better again. She's 
still on the Bactrim, and her temperature has been normal. 
(My suspicion is that her cold-and-other symptoms mean that we've set 
up some resistance on the part of her psyche since she initiated the Day 1 
program on February 2. Today is Day 18 of the program. My feeling is that 
we ought to minimize the health aspects of the sessions for a while. 
(Jane ate a better lunch than she did yesterday. She had a smoke afterward 
and I got out mail to answer. Jane put on lipstick and looked in the mirror. 
(She did more coughing and blowing as the time passed. Carla took her 
temperature — 98.8. Five minutes later Penny hooked her up to another 
dose of antibiotic. I did mail until Jane had the session. By then most of the 
drug had been absorbed, but I didn't call anybody. Jane ivas coughing 
enough so that she remarked that she hoped she could get through the session. The window was closed by now and the heat was on. It had turned 
very windy, and I thought it might mean another cold spell.) 
Now: I bid you another fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
The material given for Day 1 should definitely be reviewed today. 
The body has many ways of accelerating its own defenses (cough). 
The so-called common cold is a case in point. I will speak more 
about that kind of mechanism at another time. The body is now, 
then, going full steam ahead, so to speak. The head, neck, and shoulders are being worked on to further strengthen the arms and fingers — hence the transient condition of the eyes. 
I am, in fact, announcing myself only to let you know that I am 
indeed present and approachable, and also that I am making those 
adjustments that quicken the healing processes. Ruburt is in no 
danger (pause) of blindness, or any other dangerous condition. A 
fond early evening. 
(4:28 P.M. "I suppose that means I'm to read you the session for February 1 again," I said. She agreed. "I thought that session was the one that's 
• 126 • 
TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
resulted in all the upsets since then," I added. I noted that it was now 
conceded by both Jane and Seth that she did have a cold, as I'd asked her 
yesterday. 
(uRemember what I used to say years ago?" I suddenly asked. "It came 
out of the private material back then — that when things got worse it 
meant they were getting better. "Jane said she'd thought of that this morning. I'd forgotten all about the remark for some time, meaning years. 
(When I read this session to her, I was struck again by Seth's use of the 
word "blindness," and Jane admitted that she'd been worrying about losing 
her sight because of her eye difficulty. I laughed, but out of incredulity, not 
humor, for the other day she'd feared she was getting pneumonia. Once 
more, I wondered when that cycle of fearful response would end. "Spare 
me," I said, only half joking. I'd been surprised today when Seth had said 
tha t things were going ahead full steam. 
(Just before supper I told Jane about my dream of last night, involving 
Bill Gallagher: He'd been a white-haired stage performer, and I looked 
down on him from a box seat in the loge of an intimate, dramatically-lit theater. Bill had lost a shoe during his act, and had stopped performing out of 
frustration, his rhy thm interrupted. He stood helplessly on stage in the spotlight, wearing brightly colored stage clothes like a comedian might. Someone 
may have helped him leave the stage. I believe that before this scene, he'd 
had another similar episode, where an accident had halted his performance 
and he'd ended up frustrated and confused, but I don't remember it clearly 
enough to describe.) 
FEBRUARY 20,1984 
4:27 RM. MONDAY 
(This is Day 19 of Jane's new campaign. 
(She called me last night. I told her that I'd called the two people who'd 
sent us donations. After breakfast I called to see if the bank was open today, 
since I wanted to open the account for Jane's hospital fund, but it was 
closed for Washington's birthday. I answered Christmas cards for half an 
hour, then worked on Dreams. 
(The day was cooler — 39 — when I left for 330. Jeff was in to check 
Jane's bedsores after she got back from hydro. He took her off the antibiotic, 
and wants her to take extra vitamin C to get her urine even more on the 
BIOLOGICALLY VALID THOUGHTS 
• 101 • 
acid side. He suggested she start trying to lay on her right side also. Jane's 
feet look improved again. Her coughing and blowing has subsided somewhat, her temperature is normal 
(She ate a light lunch. Although her eyes looked better, she couldn't 
make out faces on TV at times, and later couldn't read yesterday's session at 
all "That really upsets me," she said. "I thought that when you were getting 
better it showed," I said. "So did I," she replied. Bo th of us were s till puzzled 
as to what's been going on since Day 1. I told her I'd had another dream 
last night about our moving back to 458 West Water, but that I couldn 7 
recall it This in turn triggered her own memories that she'd had several 
dreams last night that she couldn 7 recall either. 
(3:26. I read Jane yesterday's session. My idea in it, that we should 
forget the concentration on health problems for a while, was one that she'd 
had herself this morning, she told me, in surprise. She was still quite upset 
about the eye business, and so was I, although I didn't think there was anything wrong with her eyes. 
(3:45, Carla took Jane's temperature — 98.4.1 read to Jane the session 
for February 11, concerning impediments in health versus her utter freedom 
in writing. I started on the mail 
(4:09. Shannon brought Jane some vitamin C in ice cream. Jeff wants 
her to take this four times a day. 
(The heat was off in 330 and the window was open as Jane held the 
session.) 
Now, I bid you another fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
Ruburt has been trying too hard (pause), and it is not unusual for 
a period of new decision to be accompanied by a period of worrisome doubts. 
In such cases, relaxation is in order. The situation is (underlined) as I have given it. Have him imagine himself reading a session, 
or hearing you exclaim over how well he has read one. Otherwise, 
have him forget his vision as much as possible, and it will indeed 
right itself. 
There is more material along these lines, and I will see that you 
get it — though right now is not the time. In the meantime, I do touch 
those coordinates that qtiicken Ruburt's healing processes. I may or 
may not return, but know that I am present and approachable. 
• 128 • 
TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
("Thank you." 
(4:32 P.M. I read the session to Jane while she had a smoke. Seth at 
least verified some of my ideas. I told Jane that his promise of giving more 
material doesn 7 usually work ou t — Fm aware of a number of such references he's made in this series of sessions. The additional material never 
comes through. I said Fd either have to keep a list, and keep bugging her for 
the information, or she'd have to keep the instances in mind. And I 
couldn't see her doing that, especially if of ten she never even sees the typed 
session, but hears me read it to her. So Fve stopped pushing for continuances of the promised material. I know it's there, and that in certain cases 
at least, it would be very helpful if we coulcl get it.) 
FEBRUARY 21,1984 
4:40 P.M. TUESDAY 
(Today is Day 20 of Jane's new campaign. 
(She called me rather early last night. I told her Fd bought her a different brand name of liquid multiple vitamins. This morning I worked on 
Christmas mail and finished marking Chapter 5 of Dreams for the printer. 
(I finished early so Fd have some extra time to open the account for 
Jane's hospital expenses — but wouldn't you know it, the phone rang at 
11:50 A.M. It was someone from social services at the hospital. She wanted 
to know what the latest news ivas, and I told her we were doing the best we 
could. I didn 7 understand all she said, but something about the Infirmary, 
beds, and what she's been telling people. She said she ivas "getting frightened" at tubal she had to tell people. I told her Jane and I have been frightened for a long time, and she understood. I explained how I'd had to back 
off from worrying in order to save my sanity and get some work done. She 
did have a bit of news — that insurance has been asking for more records 
of Jane's care. 
(I did stop at the bank and open the account for Jane. 
(Jane went to hydro this morning. Her eyes don 7 look as red, but she 
saicl they're bothering her a great deal. She's trying to ignore it. She couldn't 
read the session after a good lunch, so I read it to her at 3:18. I'd forgotten 
to stick new mail in my envelope to work on this afternoon, though I did 
find a couple of other letters I'd forgotten. "If I didn't live so far from the 
hospital, [three miles] Fd go back and get some mail," I said in frus tra tion. 
BIOLOGICALLY VALID THOUGHTS 
• 101 • 
"I thought you were thinking about that, "Jane said. Her feet again look 
much better, and she's not coughing or blowing nearly as much. 
(The first time I read her the session she fell asleep when I got to the Seth 
material, so after she came awake with a start I read it to her again. I figured she needed the rest after the bouts of infection. 
(3:48. Lynn took Jane's blood pressure. Shannon took her temperature — 98.6 — perfect. Then Diana brought in the extra vitamin C Jane 
is getting four times a day. 
(The window was closed but there was no heat again in 330, even 
though it had been "fixed" by changing the thermostat. Seth's opening 
remarks were undoubtedly in response to my own remarks at the close of yesterday's session, when I'd written that he often didn't follow through, as 
promised, on material.) 
Now I bid you another fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
Apropos the material I mentioned yesterday (about Jane's symptoms, particularly her eyes.) 
Most such material is indeed given at a later date, though not 
always under the same heading or category, and often wound into 
another body of material. 
Specifically, I wanted to make the point that the body's actions 
are unfortunately often misread and misunderstood. The body often 
clears out, or tries ovit, its own processes — perhaps by being feverish for several days, and then by lowering the temperature once 
unwanted materials are burned out, so to speak. 
It may store urine to retain minerals at one time, and urinate 
seemingly to excess in another. When the body is basically held in 
distrust, however, all such behavior is considered dangerous and suspect. Ruburt's "cold," the bothersome eyes, are all connected with 
unusual muscular activity of the jaws, head, shoulders, arms and 
hands. In your terms, the conditions will right themselves, with the 
eye muscles being both more flexible and more elastic as needed. 
His temperature has returned to normal. His feet are returning 
to normal coloration, and his urine is cleansed. 
Now I may or may not return, according to those rhythms of 
which I speak — but know that I am present and approachable. 
("Thank you, Seth." 
• 130 • 
TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
(4:47 P.M. Seth's material was reassuring, of course, and I believed it. 
So did Jane, I think, in spite of it all. "So if you followed his stuff "1 said 
after supper, when I was getting ready to leave, "you wouldn't have taken the 
an tibiotics, and the body would have taken care of itself99 That also meant 
that in the interim Jane wouldn't have "been trying too hard,99 of course. 
("But what do you do when you 're faced with that kind of treatment in 
a place where you can't walk out if you disagree with it?" I asked. "That's 
when you're stuck . . . We're a long ways from having any medical profession think about the body like Seth does, or even like we do." 
(And no matter what Seth says, I'd still like some material on the 
extremes ofJane's behavior to her fears of ridicule, guilt, being attacked — 
the whole bit. I guess I was thinking that it's even okay to have fears, even 
strong ones, without going all the way with them so that they end up rendering one helpless. In larger terms I even understand why one would 
choose to carry certain behavior to ultimate extremes. In the short run, it's 
still not easy to grasp, however.) 
FEBRUARY 22,1984 
4:14 P.M. WEDNESDAY 
(The day was 45 degrees and bright and sunny when I left for 330. 
Jane had been to hydro this morning. Her feet continue to improve. She ate 
a fair lunch. Afterward she tried the brand of liquid vitamins I'd bought on 
the way home last night; she said they tasted better than the hospital's 
brand — but I didn't see vitamin C or E listed on the label. I'll have the 
new brand checked out by staff people. 
(After lunch Jane showed me the extra long motion she now has in her 
right arm — better straightening at the elbow. She said it was even more 
pronounced in hydro, when she lays flat and has room for the arms to reach 
farther down. I told her I hoped it was an early sign of the new healing and 
freedom Seth has been saying she's on her way to achieving through her 
latest bouts of fever, her cold, and so forth. 
(3:20. She couldn't make out the session for yesterday at all, so I read 
it to her. She said that she wanted "to do book stuff, but I'm spending all my 
time trying to find out about my health. "I said I was ivillingto forget about 
the health business for a while — a long ivhile, if necessary. It wasn 'I helping all that much, as far as I could see. Perhaps any improvements she can 
BIOLOGICALLY VALID THOUGHTS 
• 101 • 
achieve can come about better if we simply leave the whole business alone 
and quit focusing on it. I can't think of anything else to do. 
(3:43.1 read Jane the last book dictation she'd given 15 days ago, actually, on February 7. Flarcl to believe. At 4:09 Jane was given her next 
dosage of vitamin C — Jeff had changed the hours for some reason. 
(We hacl the window open and the curtains pulled shut against a 
bright sun as session time approached. Fd turned the heat back on, 
though — it was working again now, somewhat mysteriously, I thought, 
since no one has looked at it. Jane had already taken her glasses o f f , saying 
she could see better without them. Things weren 7 clear, she said, just less 
blurred. Maybe that too was a sign of improvement, I said. I don 7 wear my 
own glasses nearly as much as I used to. Jane's Seth voice ivas quieter than 
usual, and hacl a hoarse or rasping quality to a mild degree.) 
Now I bid you another fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
Dictation. (Longpause.) 
In this book, we do want our readers to 
look at body and mind in a different fashion. 
Do not think of the mind as a purely mental entity, and of the 
body as a purely physical one. Instead, think of both mind and body 
as continuing, interweaving processes that are mental and physical at 
once. Your thoughts actually are quite as physical as your body is, and 
your body is quite as nonphysical as it seems to you your thoughts are. 
You are actually a vital force, existing as a part of your environment, 
and yet apart from your environment at the same time. 
It is obvious that you impress a room with your characteristics as 
you furnish it, but you also mark (longpause) what seems to be empty 
space in the same fashion — that is, you turn empty space into the 
living matter of your body without ever realizing that you do so. Your 
health and the daily weather interact with each other. This happens 
on a personal and mass basis. I admit that some of this material quite 
contradicts yovir usual ideas, but the health of your body is intimately 
related not only to the state of world health, but to the physical 
climate as well. 
(Long pause at 4:25.) You do not "catch" a drought. You do not 
catch a cold, either. In a fashion a drought is partially caused by the 
emotional states of the people who experience it — yet a drought is 
not a disease. It is part of a process. It is a necessary portion of the 
• 132 • 
TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
larger process of the world's physical stability. As unfortunate as a 
drought might seem, it is in its way responsible for the balanced proportion of moisture of the entire planet's surface. In the same way 
diseases in their fashion are also often parts of larger processes 
whose greater purpose is the body's overall balance and (long pause) 
strength. 
(Longpause at 4:30.) You cannot see the wind directly — you see 
only its effects. The same applies to your thoughts. They possess 
power as the wind does, but you only see the effects of their actions. 
Now I may or may not return, again according to those rhythms 
of which I speak, but know that I am present and approachable. 
("Thank you." 
(4:32P.M. Jane wanted a cigarette, even though smokes make her 
cough. No one has done her vitals today, although her temperature has been 
normal. Jane had "no idea that he was going into that weather stuff." I 
read the session to her. 
(Jane called just as I finished typing this session at 9:31 P.M.) 
FEBRUARY 28,1984 
4:16 P.M. TUESDAY 
Dictation: (Time, less than five minutes) 
My thoughts go buzzing 
through time's corridors, 
winging their way 
through the sunny hours, 
dipping into shaded corners, 
sipping siveet honeycombs 
of desire, slipping through 
golden keyholes 
and flying free past 
the meadows of eternity. 
I bid them a safe journey 
as they travel ahead 
of me, for one day I ivill 
surely follow. 
BIOLOGICALLY VALID THOUGHTS 
• 101 • 
(Note: March 1, 3:05 p.m. Jane read this poem, and the one for February 
29, quite easily without her glasses. Surprised and pleased.) 
FEBRUARY 29,1984 
4:00 RM. WEDNESDAY 
Dictation: (Time, about five minutes) 
My thoughts go flying 
backward into yesterdays, 
fat honeybees 
seeking fresh nectar 
in hidden stores, 
raiding cubbyholes of desire 
and lasting honey saved 
from the past's sweet moments, 
each time growing better nourished 
than before. 
How wise I was 
to save a portion of the past 
untasted 'till now. 
MARCH 1,1984 
3:28 RM. THURSDAY 
Dictation: (Time, 3:28-3:35 P.M.) 
My history is filled 
with kingdoms lost and kingdoms found, 
with magic mirrors that open up 
into brand-new cosmic maps, 
and within my head (pause) 
glittering worlds are spread 
enough to fill 
a thousand books, (long pause) 
Multiple vision leads me on 
over paths that form (long pause) 
new worlds of fact. 
• 134 • 
TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
Dictation: (Time, 4:45-5:00 
p.m.) 
A moment from the past 
suddenly flashed before my eyes 
and there I was, on all fours 
wa tching a June bug 
head toward the grass, 
its body shining oval and hard. 
I put my face down 
as close as I could 
and stared as it moved (interruption) 
like a dark shiny live rock. 
Its shacloiu fell wrinkled 
upon the grass while its 
body glittered in the bright sunlight, (interruption) 
It made a crinkling sound 
as if its joints needed oil. . . . 
(Jane had had two interruptions by this point, from staff and for whatever reasons couldn't finish the poem. "7 hate to leave them like that," she 
said several times, then finally added a couple of lines that she wasn 't very 
satisfied with: 
. . . and it leapt on legs thin 
as dry straw. 
(Note: March 2 — Jane read her two poems again without glasses — 
just as good as she had from my notes yesterday. Not perfectly, but she did 
doit...) 
MARCH 5,1984 
MONDAY 
My mind's wings 
fly into tomorrow's skies, 
enchanting children toho shout, 
"Come see the lovely dragonfly." 
(3:48-3:49 P.M.) 
BIOLOGICALLY VALID THOUGHTS • 101 • 
Sometimes my thoughts 
go rolling downhill 
like small stones. 
Villagers below cry, 
"Look out for the avalanche!" 
(3:52-3:53 P.M.) 
Sometimes my thoughts gather force 
and roll down the beaches 
of my mind. 
Bathers cry, aHere comes 
the ninth wave." 
(3:54-3:55 P.M.) 
My thoughts need 
good straight legs. 
I bet my thoughts can 
send my legs racing 
up and down stairs 
or anywhere 
with a quickness too fast 
for me to decipher, 
because my thoughts demand 
locomotion. 
(3:58-4:00 P.M.) 
My dreams fall down 
one after another, 
melting into each other, 
and other dreamers below 
run for dry ground. 
(4:02-4:04 P.M.) 
• 136 • 
TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
MARCH 10,1984 
3:38 P.M. SATURDAY 
(After today's session — the first since February 22 — I told Jane that 
my plan when she resumed sessions was to type the session material only, 
and not the daily notes about her physical condition, temperature, and so 
forth, unless there was something out of the ordinary to note. She agreed. I 
have a record of that incidental material in my daily handwritten notes. 
Someday that material may be transcribed and used, for some as-yetunknown purpose. 
(I do want to note, however, that I met Dr. Jeff Karder as 1 walked down 
the hall from the emergency room today, on my way to climb the stairs to 
330. He asked how Jane was, asked about her work, and books, and commented quite positively on her recovery from the recent infection and fever. 
"She's very resilient, isn't she?" he said, and I could tell that he was very 
pleasantly surprised and pleased at Jane's performance. "My wife is an 
extremely strong-willed person," I said, and Jeff agreed. He said he'd be up 
to see her, but is keeping tabs on her through records. 
(Jane was pleased to hear my accoun t of the meeting. "Til bet I can use 
that, about the resiliency," she said, meaning that she'd incorporate it in 
suggestions, attitude, and so forth. Both of us were pleased that the incident 
had taken place. 
(Jane's Seth voice was a bit stronger than usual, and carried ivhat 
seemed like extra energy.) 
Now — I bid you a fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
Dictation. In any case, magic is everywhere in the operation of 
yovir body, and in the operation of the world. 
My definition of magic is this: Magic is nature unimpeded, or 
magic is life unimpeded. It is true that your thoughts and emotions 
and beliefs form the reality that you experience — but it is also true 
that this creative construction is, in a manner of speaking, magically 
formed. That is, the construction of your body and the construction 
of a world (pause) are produced with the greatest combination of 
order and spontaneity — an order and spontaneity that seems 
hidden rather than apparent (all intently). 
You think, for example, without consciously knowing how you do 
so, and you speak long sentences without consciously being aware at 
the beginning of the sentence what the conclusion will be. 
BIOLOGICALLY VALID THOUGHTS 
• 101 • 
This does not mean that you must forever remain in ignorance, 
but it does mean that there are different kinds of knowledge, and that 
all of your information does not come by reasoning alone. You grew 
from a fetus into an adult, for instance, so obviously some part of you 
does know how to perform such an amazing activity as the growth and 
care of the physical body. The reasoning mind alone, however, cannot 
by itself grow even the smallest cell, or activate the life of even one 
molecule, yet the growth and maintenance of the body is constant. 
The same hidden ability that promotes your body's health and 
vitality also fulfills and preserves the world in general. All of this is 
done playfully, and yet emerges with the greatest display of order 
and design. 
When you become too seriovis you overwork your intellect and 
tire your body, for then it seems that your entire life depends upon 
the reasoning of your intellect alone. Instead, of course, your intellectual abilities are supported and promoted by that inner mixture 
of spontaneity and order that so magically combine to form both 
your reality and the reality of the world. 
I bid yovi a fond good afternoon — 
("Thank you.") 
— and I do indeed actuate those coordinates that regenerate all 
aspects of your lives in general. 
("Thank you," I said again. 
(4:02 P.M. Jane saicl she was glacl she'd had the session. 
(I meant to add in the opening notes that Jane's resiliency was proving 
a learning experience for Jeff Karder as ivell as for her and me.) 
MARCH 12,1984 
3:08-3:12 RM. MONDAY 
(Dictation.) 
Winter birds sing 
their winter song 
while the chill wind blows 
above the frozen lawn. 
Where will the birds go 
when evening comes ? 
• 138 • 
TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
Who will feed the winter birds 
that sit on branches, 
post or fence? 
I feed them corn and crumbs of bread 
and listen to their winter song 
as the snowflakes fly 
above the frozen lawn, 
for the winter birds greet 
the winter dusk and dawn. 
(Note: Jane sang this poem as she read it on March 
Said she'd originally thought of it as a song, but hadn't 
me before.) 
13 — quite good. 
mentioned that to 
CHAPTER 3 
DAREDEVILS, DEATH-DEFIERS, AND HEALTH 
MARCH 13,1984 
4:10 P.M. TUESDAY 
a
ane's Seth voice was a bit stronger than usual, more forceful, and with 
the usual pauses.) 
Now — I bid you another fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
Dictation. Chapter 3 — you have the heading. 
(Jane gave it to me yesterday afternoon: "Daredevils, Death-Defiers, 
and Health.") 
At first thought, it certainly seems as if people love life and fear 
death — that they seek pleasure and avoid pain. 
Yet this is not always the case. There are people who must feel 
themselves to be at the brink of death before they can fully appreciate the quality of life. There are people who cannot appreciate or 
enjoy the satisfaction of life or of happiness unless faced simultaneously with the threat of death or intense pain. 
There are other people who firmly believe that the pursuit of 
pleasure must lead to pain, and there are also others for whom pain 
itself is pleasure. (Long pause.) There are also individuals whose 
beliefs caLise them to feel very uncomfortable when they are in a 
state of health — and for these individuals poor health brings a 
sense of security and safety. 
• 139 • 
• 140 • 
TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
There are innumerable stages of health, from high, sheer, energetic exuberance (long pause) to dwindling lethargy and discomfort. 
In that sentence, scratch out "dwindling." There are, in fact, an 
almost infinite number of stages connected with the state of health. 
You could invent a completely different way of regarding human 
health by numbering and defining each of those stages. Instead, of 
course, your society has chosen to recognize and define all of those 
stages that are detrimental to health — stages that are recognizable 
because of health's absence to one degree or another. 
In this book, therefore, we will devote ourselves to ways of promoting health, and we will purposely avoid the specific naming of 
dis-hyphen-eases. Period. 
(4:22.) It should be noted before we begin that death itself is the 
delivery — a deliverer — of your species and all others. It is not 
negative in itself, but instead is the beginning of a different kind of 
positive existence. It prunes the planet, so to speak, so that there is a 
room and time for all, energy and food for all. Because of death, life 
is possible, so these two seemingly opposite qualities are simply different versions of the same phenomena. 
If death disappeared on your planet even an hour all of life 
would soon be threatened. And if all life possible suddenly emerged 
at once, then most surely all would be annihilated. We must admit, 
then, that death is indeed a part of life — and even more, we must 
say that death is healthy. 
Take your break. 
(4:28-4:36.) 
Now: End of dictation. 
A comment about your dream. It was, as you supposed, of a telepathic nature. There is a cellular communication between or among all 
of earth's living cells, as if the earth itself were one large physical body. 
Your own knowledge, desire, purpose and intent tuned you into 
some such communications, so your concern for Joe Bumbalo (our 
next-door neighbor on Pinnacle Road) tuned you into his physical and 
emotional state at that time. 
Now I bid you a most fond good afternoon — and once again, 
the sessions themselves do indeed set up excellent coordinates for 
the improvement of health and healing. 
DAREDEVILS, DEATH-DEFIERS, AND HEALTH 
• 141 • 
("Thank you very much." 
(4:40 P.M. "That reminded me of the old days," Jane said, pleased at 
the way the session had come through. 
(On March 6, 19841 wrote this in the daily notes I make each day at 
the hospital: "This afternoon I described to Jane my dream last night about 
Joe Bumbalo. I dreamed he was taken very ill with heart trouble — that all 
he wanted to do was lay on his back in bed — I think in a trailer environment. His wife Margaret was there, and myself. I9m not sure if this meant 
Joe's death or not, I tolcl Jane." 
(I then more or less forgot the dream. At 11:55 A.M., as I was waiting for 
a callfrom our lawyer, John Bumbalo, Joe's son, called. He wanted to borroio 
my car. Flis had just frozen up due to unsuspected overheating; he had to be 
at the Chemung County airport at 2:30 to pick up his sister Judy, flying in 
from the Midwest, then again at 5:30 to pick up Margaret and Joe. I was 
of course amazed, since the parents weren't due back from Florida 'till May. 
(Joe, John said, has been taken very ill — pains throughout his body, 
in the bones, bu t also in the heart area. /I test of fluid drawn from the heart 
area had shown free-floating cancer cells. A CAT-scan did not reveal where 
they came from. Joe had lain in bed in the trailer, and Margaret had resisted 
sending him to a hospital. His diabetes is out of control. As I drove John to 
the hospital, he said the date of my dream checked with developments Margaret had described. I may have tuned into the testing of the fluid around 
the heart, but I doubt if this can ever be confirmed. It doesn't matter. John 
took the car after leaving me at the hospital, and called at 6:45 to say "mission accomplished," that all were home now. He picked me up at 7:05. The 
weather is poor, and we had a couple of fairly close calls as he drove me 
home. I told him to have Margaret call me when I can visit them. 
(Jane remembered my dream, and we recalled my saying at the time that 
we hoped it didn't work out. Evidently it has. On the way home, John said 
a later report showed that Joe does have cancer throughout his body.) 
MARCH 15,1984 
4:06 RM. THURSDAY 
(Jane's Seth voice was stronger than usual — indeed, almost loud at 
times, with the usual pauses.) 
Now: I bid you a fond good afternoon — 
• 142 • 
TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
— and we will resume dictation. 
Individuals who defy death time and time again are actaally more 
frightened of it than most other people are. Trapeze performers, 
stunt men and women, race-car riders, and many other groups have 
a life-style that includes death-defying stunts on a very regular basis. 
Trapeze performers may have several acts a day, for example. It 
seems that such individuals perform with great daring, even with a 
rashness that is unfamiliar to most people. Most such performers, 
however, are extremely regulated. They work with a carefully calculated eye, under conditions in which each detail, however minute, is 
of supreme importance. No matter how often certain trapeze acts 
may be repeated, for example, there is always the threat of instant 
disaster — of missed footing, a final plunge. Through testing "fate," 
death-defiers try each time, they perform to prove to themselves that 
they are indeed safe, that they can overcome life's most dire conditions. Period. 
Life, then, has the sweetest buoyancy, the greatest satisfaction, 
because it is contrasted with the ever-present threat of death. Many 
such people do not feel at all safe living under life's usual conditions. 
They protect themselves by setting up the conditions of such an 
encounter, and controlling those conditions, again down to the 
smallest detail. 
(Longpause at 4:16.) Only when they pursue some death-defying 
career do such individuals feel safe enough to relax otherwise and 
live a fairly normal life outside of their death-defying careers. 
I do not mean to pass any moral judgment upon such activities. 
Often they do permit an extremely keen sense of exuberance and 
vitality. It is also true, however, that such people may enjoy excellent 
health for years, not counting perhaps an assortment of broken 
bones and bruises — only to fall suddenly prone to some illness if 
they try to give up their activities. 
This need not be the case, of course. Self-understanding and selfknowledge may be able to change the individuals' lives for the better, 
regardless of their activities or conditions of life. It is true that these 
individuals do choose for themselves a carefully planned and regulated 
style of life, in which the threat of death is encountered personally 
DAREDEVILS, DEATH-DEFIERS, AND HEALTH 
• 143 • 
and regularly; each day becomes an odyssey, in which death and life 
are purposefully weighed. Period. 
Children may come down with many childhood diseases, and 
still be very healthy children indeed. Adults may break a bone skiing, 
or indulging in some other sport, and still be very healthy. (Long 
pause.) People "come down" with colds, or the flu, or some other 
social disease that is supposed to be passed from one individual to 
another — yet overall these may be very healthy individuals. The 
body has its own self-regulating system. This is often called the 
immune system. 
If people become ill, it is quite fashionable to say that the immunity system (Seth's pronunciation) has temporarily failed — yet the 
body itself knows that certain "dis-eases" are healthy reactions. The 
body does not regard diseases as diseases, in usually understood 
terms. It regards all activity as experience, as a momentary condition 
of life (pause), as a balancing situation. But it possesses a sense of 
wholeness and of overall integrity, for it knows that it continues to 
exist, though under different conditions, and it realizes that this 
change is as natural and necessary as the change of seasons if each 
individual is to continue to exist, while the earth itself possesses the 
nutriments necessary to the survival of physical life. 
End of dictation. 
Again, I do indeed accelerate those coordinates that so promote 
overall vitality and healing, and I bid you a most fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth." 
(4:42 P.M. Jane had a smoke and a sip of water before I turned her over. 
(When I got home from 3301 called Margaret Bumbalo. Joe is in the 
hospital, room 560, and has a sarcoma in or surrounding the heart area. 
He gets chemotherapy tomorrow, so I won't see him until the next day. He 
can come home between treatments. His diabetes isn't yet under control. 
(In my dream I'd written that he had a heart attack, but this appears to 
be off the mark, although pinpointing the correct area of his trouble. At 
times I've even wondered if I recorded the dream accurately, since in it I 
didn't see him having a heart attack, only rubbing his chest area with Margaret helping him, and myself there as only a ivitness. Margaret thinks the 
dream remarkable, and is going to check details time-wise.) 
• 144 • 
TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
MARCH 16,1984 
3:58 RM. FRIDAY 
I bid you another fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth,") 
We will resume dictation. 
Before we can really study the nature of health or illness, we must 
first understand human consciousness and its relationship with the 
body. 
You know that you have a conscious mind, of course. You also 
possess what is often called the subconscious, and this merely consists of feelings, thoughts or experiences that are connected to your 
conscious mind, but would be considered excess baggage if you had 
to be aware of them all of the time. Otherwise they would vie for your 
attention, and interfere with the present decisions that are so important. Period. 
If you tried to hold all of those subconscious memories uppermost in your mind all of the time, then you would literally be unable 
to think or act in the present moment at all. You do more or less have 
a certain access to your own subconscious mind, however. It is perhaps easier to imagine a continuum of consciousness, for you have a 
body consciousness also, and that body consciousness is itself made 
up of the individual consciousness of each molecule that forms all 
parts of the body itself. 
(Longpause at 4:06.) It is sometimes fashionable to say that men 
and women have conscious minds, subconscious minds, and unconscious minds — but there is no such thing as an unconscious mind. 
The body consciousness is highly conscious (underlined). You are 
simply not usually conscious of it. (Long pause.) Reasoning takes 
time. It deals with problem-solving — it forms an hypothesis, and 
then seeks to prove it by trial and error. 
(4:10. Carla, temp. 98.5. Iread the session toJane sofar. Resume at 4:15.) 
If you had to use that kind of process before you could move a 
muscle, you would get nowhere at all, of course. The other portions 
of your consciousness, then, deal with a kind of automatic thinking, 
and operate with a kind of knowledge that takes no time in your terms. 
You might say that the varying portions of your own consciousness operate at several different speeds. Translations between one 
portion of consciousness and another goes on constantly, so that 
DAREDEVILS, DEATH-DEFIERS, AND HEALTH 
• 145 • 
information is translated from one "speed" to another. Perhaps you 
can begin to understand, then, that the whole picture of health or illness must be considered from many more viewpoints than you might 
earlier have supposed. Many of you have been saturated by conventional, distorted ideas concerning health and illness in general. You 
might think, for example, of the body being invaded by viruses, or 
attacked by a particular disease, and these ideas, then, may make you 
question. You might well wonder why the body consciousness does 
not simply rise up and cast off any threatening diseases: why would 
the body allow certain cells to go berserk, or outgrow themselves? 
The very concept of the immunity system suggests, at least, the disease invader against which the body's immunity system must or 
should surely defend itself. 
That is the end of dictation. 
I bid you another most fond good afternoon — and again, I activate those coordinates that accelerate the healing processes. 
("Good afternoon, Seth." 
(4:27 P.M.) 
MARCH 18,1984 
4:19 P.M. SUNDAY 
Now — I bid you another fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
We will resume dictation for now — but I always do keep your 
personal concerns in mind. 
Dictation. You usually think of your conscious mind as your ego. 
It is directed toward action in physical life. Many schools of thought 
(longpause) seem to have the curious ideas that the ego is inferior to 
other portions of the self, or "selfish," and imagine it to be definitely 
of a lower quality than the inner self, or the soul. 
In the first place, it is really impossible to separate portions of the 
self, and we make such distinctions only in an effort to explain the 
many facets of the personality. (Long pause.) It is generally understood, then, that you do have an ego, directed toward exterior activity, and in those terms (underlined) you also have an inner ego. It is 
also conscious, and is the director of all automatic interior activity 
(emphatically). 
• 146TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
Most people do not realize that they can indeed have access to 
this inner awareness. This inner ego or inner self should not be 
thought of as superior to your ordinary mind. It should not be 
thought of, really, as something separate from your ordinary mind. 
Your ego and your ordinary consciousness bring into focus all of 
your physical experiences, and make possible the brilliant preciseness of physical experience. 
It is true that physical life represents only one — 
(4:30. Temperature: normal Resume at 4:32.) 
— condition of being. You have other kinds of existence, then. The 
conscious mind is one brilliant segment of your larger consciousness, 
but it is composed of the same universal energy and vitality that composes all consciousness. There are ways of communicating with the 
inner ego or inner self, however, and we will discuss some of these very 
shortly. It is important, again, to remember that this inner ego or 
inner self (longpause) uses a process that is far swifter than reasoning. 
When such communications are made, therefore, they often 
consist of inspiration, intuition, impulses, and deal with feeling far 
more than with usual logical thinking. 
End of dictation. 
(4:38.) Your dream, Joseph, as you supposed, represented a state 
of mind ahd of confusion. It was not, for example, precognitive, but 
it did inform you — using images and feelings — of the picture that 
was sometimes painted in different terms by your conscious thoughts. 
Ruburt could have had the same kind of dream, for example. 
His eyes are not deteriorating. I will have more to say concerning 
your fund later this week, I bid you both a fond good afternoon, and 
I do indeed quicken those coordinates that accelerate the healing 
processes. 
("All right. Thank you." 
(4:43 P.M. Jane had a cigarette. I read the session to her before turning 
her on her side preparatory to taking my own nap. 
(Jeff Karder had been in to see Jane this morning, and had seemed 
pleased enough as he examined her bedsores, and so forth. He'd also agreed 
that she could forget the sleeping pill at night before sleep, and stick to just 
aspirin — a definite improvement. He hadn't, however, held out any hope 
tha t Jane could get to sit up, because of her broken righ t leg, and this had 
depressed her. She said she had decided to stick to book work and do the best 
DAREDEVILS, DEATH-DEFIERS, AND HEALTH 
• 147 • 
she can. I fell somewhat discouraged also, and agreed there was little else we 
could do at this time, since nothing else seemed to be working. She did read 
a little better today, without her glasses, but I still ended up reading the last 
session to her. 
(Seth commented upon the fund, perhaps, because of the letter I took to 
read Jane, from Mary Newman. This most kind and generous lady offered 
substantial financial help if we need it. I've tried to call her twice so far. 
Jane suggested I send her a copy of Oversoul Seven. If I can't reach her 
soon, I'll write her again. Through mutual friends Jane and I had met 
Mary several years ago: while on a business trip to New York City, we had 
stayed at her apartmen t for a number of days. 
(My dream Seth referred to look place yesterday morning, and was so 
vivid I lay awake for an hour after having it. It stayed with me all day. 
Because is was so vivid, it would make a great series of paintings. It obviously expressed my conscious fears about our situation, and in it I ended up 
lost amid old factory buildings, with the car gone. I ivas naked, saying, 
"I've lost my way," to a girl, possibly a nurse, seated at a desk in a cavernous, vacant, rust-red old room. I'd even found myself exploring the town 
dump ofElmira — only the landscape looked volcanic, beautiful in its own 
way, heaped with gray fine ash like the surface of the moon, almost.) 
MARCH 19,1984 
4:21 P.M. MONDAY 
(Jane had been blue and depressed yesterday, and she was that way 
again when I got to 330 today. There were tears before lunch. She'd called 
last night. I told her I'd talked with Mary Newman this morning, boosted 
our insurance coverage, and called Jim Baker, our optometrist. Jane is 
hoping that if he can give her new glasses her vision will improve, and this 
would help her spirits. 
(She was still blue at session time, but her Seth voice was stronger than 
usual.) 
Now I bid you another fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
We will resume dictation, and the following session should be 
particularly taken to heart by Ruburt (intently). 
Each person is a vital (long pause), conscious portion of the universe. Each person, simply by being, fits into the universe and into 
• JLDS • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
universal purposes in a way no one else can. Each person's existence 
sends its own ripples throughout time. The universe is conscious at 
every conceivable point of itself. Each being is an individualized segment of the universe; then, in human terms, each person is a 
beloved individual, formed with infinite care and love, uniquely 
gifted with a life like no other. 
No animal considers itself a failure, obviously. People, however, 
often identify with their seeming mistakes, forgetting [pause) their 
abilities in other directions, so that it seems that they are misfits in 
the universe, or in the world. The conscious mind can indeed have 
such thoughts because it so often tries to solve all problems on its 
own, until it begins to feel frightened, overburdened, and a failure in 
its own eyes. 
The inner ego, however, always identifies with its source-identity 
as a beloved, individualized.portion of the universe. It is aware of the 
universal love that is its heritage. 
(Pause at 4:33.) It is also aware of the infinite power and strength 
that composes the very fabric of its being. Through being made 
aware of these facts, the exterior ego can begin to feel a quicker 
sense of support and nourishment. The knowledge can let it relax, 
let go, so that it feels its life couched and safe, and knows itself to be 
indeed a beloved child of the universe, both ancient and young at 
once, with an identity far beyond the annals of time. 
It is of great value, then, that each person remember this universal affiliation. Such a reminder can often allow the inner self to send 
needed messages of strength and love through the various levels, 
appearing as inspiration, dreams, or simply pure bursts of feeling. 
The inner ego (long pause) draws instant and continuous support 
from the universal consciousness, and the more the exterior ego 
keeps that fact in mind, the greater its own sense of stability, safety, 
and self-esteem. 
(4:41.) One of the attitudes detrimental to good health is that of 
self-condemnation, or dislike of the self. Such attitudes are unfortunately sometimes fostered by parents, schools, and religions. Feelings 
of self-worth, self-esteem, and pleasure with one's abilities promote 
feelings of well-being, health, and exuberance. 
End of dictation. 
DAREDEVILS, DEATH-DEFIERS, AND HEALTH 
• 149 • 
(4:45.) Read this to Ruburt once a day for several days, and it will 
also be of help to you. 
("Yes.") 
The session should, on its own, clear up some of Ruburt's difficulties and increase his pleasures. 
(4:46 P.M. Itwas time to turn Jane. 1 read her the session after supper. She 
called me, with Carta's help, at 9:20, as I was finishing typing the session.) 
MARCH 20,1984 
4:25 P.M. TUESDAY 
(Jane seemed to feel somewhat better today, and she described the way 
she was now attempting to look at the world in general and her own situation in particular. I told her her attitude was a great improvement. Her eyes 
looked better also. She tried reading yesterday's session, but got only halfway 
down the first page, so I read it all to her. It's an excellent session, and, as 
Seth suggested, I'll be reading it to her for at least several days. 
(Once again, today her Seth voice was stronger than usual, with pauses.) 
I bid you another fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
We will resume dictation. 
The universe actively loves itself and all of its parts. The world 
loves itself and all of its parts. It is not true that energy is neutral or 
indifferent. Energy is active, positive, propelled by what can almost 
be called an instantaneous pleasure with itself and its characteristics. 
Despite all concepts to the contrary, energy is indeed at its basis, 
love. (Pause.) It is also composed of highly charged consciousness 
that operates almost in a leapfrog fashion, with great bursts of exuberance and vitality. The great — the greatest creative force — that 
force that is the origin for all physical life — did not suddenly appear 
once in some distant past, sparking the birth of your reality, endowing it with an energy that could only then run down, or dissipate. 
Instead, ever-new virgin energy, so to speak, is created constantly, and 
appears at every conceivable point within your universal system. 
Each new rose in the springtime is in truth a new rose, composed 
of completely new and unique energy, utterly itself, innocent, alive 
in the world. 
• 150TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
(Longpause at 4:36.) In the deepest of terms, while each body has 
a history, each moment in the body's existence is also new, freshly 
emerging into the world, innocent and unique. While there is 
indeed pain in the world, it is the miraculous principle of pleasure 
that propels life itself. 
End of dictation. 
There are actually several new twists in this material, as you should 
see when you read it over. I bid you now a fond good afternoon. 
(uGood afternoon, Seth. " 
(4:41. Jane hadn't seen that it was so late, she said. 
(There are indeed "new twists " in the material, some of which I cannot 
really put into words — but Seth's creative gifts have yet to be exhausted, 
I note. 
(I should also note that today, with a bit of a struggle, I carried in to 
330 a large vase con taining long hollyhocks and irises. The gorgeous flowers are part of a package of flowers wired to us from a reader in Holland. 
Neighbor John Bumbalo took delivery of the package yesterday afternoon 
while I was at the hospital, and brought it over as soon as he saw me drive 
into the garage. There were so many flowers in the package that I ended up 
dividing them among three vases I found here at the house. I'll take another 
one — tulips this time — in to Jane tomorrow.) 
MARCH 21,1984 
4:15 P.M. WEDNESDAY 
(Jane didn't call last night. She felt better today. I told her I'd deposited 
$1200 in her hospital-expenses account on my way to 330. We're very grateful for the help readers are offering. She ate a good lunch. Afterward she 
read yesterday's session, and the one for the day before, in far better fashion 
than she's been able to do for many days. She wore glasses, and read in a 
good strong voice.) 
Now — I bid you a fond good afternoon, and we will resume 
dictation. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
Those who look upon physical life as inferior to some other more 
perfect spiritual existence do a great injustice to physical existence in 
general. Physical life is everywhere filled with the universal energy 
that is its source, so it can hardly be inferior to it's own composition. 
DAREDEVILS, DEATH-DEFIERS, AND HEALTH 
• 151 • 
Again, corporeal reality is a brilliant segment of existence. It 
cannot be inferior to existence. It is because you so often view your 
world through a system of highly limited beliefs that you so often 
misread the implications of temporal life. Period. 
(Long pause.) Such beliefs serve to limit your comprehension, 
until it seems often that physical life consists of a frantic struggle for 
survival at every level of consciousness. Such ideas certainly do not 
foster feelings of security, health, or well-being, and they distort the 
nature of your physical environment. 
That environment is not something separate from yovirself, for you 
to control. Instead, you and the environment support, strengthen, 
and fortify each other in ways that often escape you. (Pause.) All portions of the environment contain their own kinds of consciousness. 
They are aware of their own parts in the body of the world, so to 
speak, and they are aware not only of their own conditions, but of 
their relationships to all other portions of the world. They add to the 
world's health, in other words, and your own vitality — and that of 
your environment — are everywhere interrelated. 
End of dictation. 
(4:33.) I bid you another fond good afternoon, and again I activate those coordinates that are so vital for healing and well-being. 
("Thank you." 
(4:34 P.M. "I felt that was sort of slow," Jane said. 
( "It was," I said. Seth had used many pauses. I toas a bit surprised that 
he'd ended the session so quickly, given the slow pace. So was Jane.) 
CHAPTER 4 
THE BROKEN-HEARTED, THE HEARTLESS, 
AND MEDICAL TECHNOLOGY 
MARCH 23,1984 
4:00 P.M. FRIDAY 
y
ane clidn9t call last night. She's still somewhat depressed — said she 
hasn'I slept as well since taking the night medication prescribed by J e f f . 
With her glasses, Jane did fairly well reading most of the sessions for March 
19 and 21. 
(At 3:10 Jane saicl she'd just picked up from Seth the heading for Chapter 4 of the book — that she had to reach a certain level of well-being before 
she could get his material, obviously. 
(Her Seth voice was good, but with many pauses.) 
Now — I bid you a most fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
We will resume dictation. 
Many psychiatrists and psychologists now realize that a disturbed 
client (longpause) cannot be helped sufficiently unless the individual 
is considered along with his or her relationship to the family unit. 
The same idea really applies to physical illness as well. It is possible, however, to carry this idea even further, so that a person in poor 
health should be seen by the physician in relationship to the family, 
and also in relationship to the environment. Old-time family doctors 
. 1*9 . 
THE BROKEN-HEARTED. THE HEARTLESS 
• 153 • 
understood the patient's sensitivity to family members and to the 
environment, of course, and they often felt a lively sympathy and 
understanding that the practitioners of modern medicine often 
seem to have forgotten. 
I am speaking of a deeper relationship to the environment, however, and of the environment's symbolic as well as practical aspects in 
relationship to health and illness. Your ideas about your own body, your 
mind, the universe and your part in it, and your relationship to family, 
friends, and environment are all connected to your state of health, to 
your sense of well-being, or your feelings of dis-hyphen-ease. Period. 
In the next chapter let us look more specifically at the importance of symbolism in your mind, your body, and your environment. 
Chapter 4: "The Broken-Hearted, the Heartless, and Medical 
Technology." 
Take your break. 
(4:12. Jane had a sip of water. Seth 's chapter heading is the same as the 
one she'd picked up from him earlier this afternoon, she said. Resume at 
4:20, with many pauses.) 
Now: Modern medical science largely considers the human body 
to be a kind of mechanical model, a sort of vehicle like a car that 
needs to be checked by a garage every so often. 
As an automobile is put together at an assembly line, so the body 
is simply seen as a very efficient machine put together in nature's 
"factory." If all the parts are in their proper places, and functioning 
smoothly, then the machine should give as excellent service as any 
well-running automobile — or so it seems. 
All of the automobile's parts, however, are alone responsible for 
its operation as long as it has a responsible driver. There are, however, hidden relationships that exist between various parts of the 
body — and the parts themselves are hardly mechanical. They 
change in every moment. 
The heart is often described as a pump. (Long pause.) With the 
latest developments in medical technology, there are all kinds of 
heart operations that can be performed, even the use of heart transplants. In many cases, even when hearts are repaired through medical technology, the same trouble reoccurs at a later date, or the 
patient recovers only to fall prey to a different, nearly fatal or fatal, 
• 154TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
disease. This is not always the case, by any means, but when such a 
person does recover fully, and maintains good health, it is because 
beliefs, attitudes, and feelings have changed for the better, and 
because the person "has a heart" again, comma, in other words, 
because the patient himself has regained the will to live. 
End of dictation. 
(Resume at 4:36, again with many pauses.) 
Many people who have heart trouble feel that they have "lost the 
heart" for life. They may feel broken-hearted for any of many reasons. 
They may feel heartless, or imagine themselves to be so cold-hearted 
that they punish themselves literally by trying to lose their heart. 
With many people having such difficulties, the addition of love 
in the environment may work far better than any heart operation. A 
new pet given to a bereaved individual has saved more people from 
needing heart operations than any physician. In other words, "a love 
transplant" in the environment may work far better overall than a 
heart-transplant operation, or a bypass, or whatever; in such ways the 
heart is allowed to heal itself. 
End of session. I bid you a fond good afternoon, and again I 
quicken those coordinates that are so important to health and vitality. 
("Thank you. " 
(4:43 P.M. "I felt he was trying to make certain points," Jane said, 
"and I hope that I got it through clear enough — you know what I mean ? 
I guess I said it right," she added, after hesitating in an attempt to say herself what Seth had said, if only briefly. 
("I was also getting," she said, "that he wasn't saying that people 
didn't need those operations sometimes, but that when they did, they needed 
those other things in order to make the operations work." 
(As we talked Jane impressed upon me that she'd definitely picked up 
that a household pet would help our neighbor Joe Bumbalo a great cleal — 
she wants me to be sure to impress upon Margaret Bumbalo that this is the 
case; she felt it strongly, it wasn't just a generalized idea, Jane said.) 
MARCH 25,1984 
4:13 RM. SUNDAY 
(Jane didn't call me last night. In the mail for yesterday I found the 
new cover design for the trade paper edition o/The God of Jane — a niceTHE BROKEN-HEARTED. THE HEARTLESS 
• 155 • 
looking job, we like it. And I found another check for $1000 in a letter, as 
a donation to Jane's hospital-expenses fund. I wondered if any of these 
even ts — or all of them — were tied in with the feeling of an ticipation I'd 
been quite conscious of yesterday afternoon at 330. I'd told Jane about the 
sensations. 
(I might add that yesterday I opened a letter from the BBC — the 
British Broadcasting Corporation — that was dated in January. I don't 
know how long it's been at the house. The producer wanted to know about 
doing a series on Jane's work. Maybe that was connected to my feeling of 
anticipation . . . 
(Once again, Jane's Seth voice was good, with the usual pauses.) 
Now — I bid you a fond good afternoon — 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
— and we will resume dictation. 
Later on we will discuss more thoroughly distorted ideas about 
the self and the body in particular that stand in the way of natural 
exuberance and good health. 
Without going more deeply into the reasons for such beliefs 
until later, let me discuss several of the ways in which they impede 
general well-being. Right now it is socially fashionable to take up 
some kind of exercise, gym work, or strenuous sport, so it seems 
obvious that the general populace must have a great regard for the 
physical body. Unfortunately, large segments of the population feel 
uncomfortable with their bodies, and do not trust the body's 
spontaneity, strength, or overall dependability. They have been 
taught that medical science knows more about bodies than any 
private individual knows about their own bodies and their ways and 
workings. 
People have been taught to trust X-rays for a picture of what is 
happening within their bodies, and cautioned not to trust their own 
feelings. Period. Some public-service announcements stress the 
"fact" that the individual can be gravely threatened by high blood 
pressure, for example, even though he or she feels in excellent physical health. 
The populace has embarked upon this strong exercise program 
because of a mixture of very unfortunate beliefs. Since they feel 
divorced from their bodies, many people suspect what is going on 
inside. Some religious beliefs suggest that the body is impure, and the 
• JLDS • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
heir to disease and infirmity. Often people exercise over-zealously to 
punish their bodies, or to force the body to respond at its best, since 
they do not trust it to do otherwise. 
(4:27.) In many instances people exercise quite simply because 
they are afraid of what will happen if they do not. They may run to 
avoid heart disease, for example, while their own fear can help to 
promote the very eventuality they fear. 
The body's health is the expression of inner well-being. Poor 
health is an expression also, and it may serve many purposes. (Pause.) 
It goes without saying that some people become ill rather than change 
their activities and their environments. They may also become ill, of 
course, to force themselves to make such changes. 
End of dictation. 
MARCH 27,1984 
4:12 P.M. TUESDAY 
(Jane called last night. Margaret Bumbalo visited her just as I was 
leaving. 
(At 11:00 this morning our lawyer called to tell me that Blue Cross has 
agreed to pay our insurance claim. I could hardly believe it, and barely 
reacted to the news. I did ask if he knew whether the company is paying 
80% or 100%, and he didn't know. If it's the former figure, we'll still owe 
a hefty bill. 
("Seth ivas right, "Jane said with a smile as soon as I gave her the news. 
During the afternoon she said that she'cl never worried about the insurance 
question. I think the good news may not have penetrated my psyche yet, not 
even as I type these lines at 9:00 P.M. After talking to our lawyer this morning I went back to work on Dreams just as though nothing had happened. 
However, that mixture of dread and anticipation I've felt every day for 
months when I went to the mail box should now begin to dissipate. 
(I told Jane that last night I'd had another long, torturous dream in 
which I'd been pursued through rooms by unknown men who were after me 
for some unexplained reason. I always got away and hid, in room after 
room, but the dream was an upsetting one, like that I'd had a week or so 
ago, when I'd lost my way amid a series of deserted factory buildings on the 
edge of Elmira. I still recall that one vividly. 
THE BROKEN-HEARTED. THE HEARTLESS 
• 157 • 
(I understood the import of last night's dream much better than its predecessor, however, having learned what that first dream meant — my own 
fears on a number of counts. 
(fane's sight has improved, as well as movement in both arms and other 
places. I read her two letters from female scientists in California that, I 
thought, would cheer her a great deal, since they both stressed the value of 
her work. And they did help. Jane also read a couple of recent sessions herself, and marched right along through them for the most part — better than 
she has been doing by quite a bit. 
(After I'd told her about the insurance thing, and Jane hacl told me 
about her increased motions, she added that she now felt that everything 
would be fine, and that she would recover. What a treat that will be! 
(Jane's Seth voice was good, with pauses.) 
I bid you another fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
We will resume dictation. Congratulations after the long wait 
concerning your insurance. I understand that the wait seemed 
longer to you than to me, but I was not concerned. 
(Seth was almost amused and understanding at once. After the session 
I told Jane that he'd said more than he realized — that in the case of 
predictions it would be wise of us to remind ourselves that his sense of 
time is indeed far different than ours, that much more time could be 
involved on our parts than on his. This in turn had reminded me of 
my dream of months ago, when from the elevator tower of the hospital 
I'd looked out a window to see checks from the insurance company lying 
on the asphalt at the side of the left front wheel of the car. I'd interpreted 
that dream to mean that a meaningful settlement was still far away 
from us, but there nevertheless. I do not recall the date of the dream without 
checking. 
(Pause.) Now: Dictation. I do not mean to imply that exercise is 
detrimental to good health. It is true, however, that the reason that 
you exercise is actually more important than the exercises that you 
do perform. The reason can promote your good health or actually 
impede it. 
Thus far in this book, we have barely begun to touch upon the 
multitudinous issues involved in good health or in its absence. 
Before we are finished we hope to give you a far greater framework 
• JLDS • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
in which to consider your own well-being and the many options that 
are open to any individual. We will discuss the aspects connected 
with a long, healthy, fairly happy lifetime, and those involved with 
early death, severe illnesses, and suicide — particularly with the suicides of fairly young persons. 
Earlier we spoke about the incredible impulse on the part of all 
of nature toward exuberance and well-being. It is as if nature always 
tries to exceed itself, and certainly to increase the quality of its existence. The individual person is also involved in an ever-continuing 
process to increase the quality of life as it exists at all levels of personal experience. Reality is so constructed that each individual seeking such fulfillment does so noj at the expense of others, but in such 
a way that the quality of life is increased for all. 
(Long pause at 4:22.) Each person impulsively tries to grow into 
his or her sensed potentials — even when they are not immediately 
apparent. 
In one way or another each segment of consciousness is aware of 
each other segment, through an instantaneous communication that 
exists on many levels. It is important that your ideas circulate freely, 
and that the ideas of the peoples of the world circulate freely, just as 
it is important that your individual body has good circulation. Your 
ideas about your own health are even more important than those 
steps you take to promote it. 
Your ideas about foreign countries, allies and enemies, also have 
a vital role to play in how you handle your own bodily defenses. 
People who are afraid that their nation will be invaded by an enemy 
will often also consider viruses or diseases to be enemies, ever about 
to threaten their personal survival. Such attitudes will, of course, be 
detrimental to feelings of well-being, health, and exuberance. While 
it is true that medical technology has many serious defects, it is also 
true that many people believe in the medical profession to such a 
degree that it would be nearly impossible for them to survive in good 
health without it. 
Later on in this book we will also discuss the ways in which you 
can use your own beliefs about the medical profession to reinforce 
your overall sense of health, rather than to undermine it. 
End of dictation. 
THE BROKEN-HEARTED. THE HEARTLESS 
• 159 • 
(4:34.) Overall, you have both activated Framework 2* sufficiently 
enough so that its effects are beneficially appearing in all areas of 
your lives — including the physical area. 
I bid you now a fond good afternoon, and I do indeed activate 
those coordinates that quicken healing and exuberance. 
("Okay. Thank you." 
(4:36 P.M. I read the session to Jane. That's the first time Seth has ever 
said that we were doing that well with Framework 2, Fm sure. And in all 
areas, yet! Maybe we are learning some things, Jane. I love you. Sleep well.) 
APRIL 2,1984 
3:58 P.M. MONDAY 
(This is Jane's first session in six days — quite an unusual occurrence 
for her. 
(Fve made good use of the time. I have every letter in the house 
answered. Fve paid bills and actually feel like I can relax and draw a deep 
breath at limes, when I consider the improving state of our finances, work, 
insurance problems, and so forth. 
(On March 29, last Thursday, I failed to get to the hospital to see Jane 
for the first lime since she was admitted last April 20. The reason was 
simple: a late snowstorm of very deep and heavy wet snoiv the night before, 
and continuing on into the next day, had split the Chinese elms in the back 
yard and caused the one nearest the garage to fall across the driveway, so I 
couldn't get the car out of the garage. The trees are ruined. Insurance will 
not pay for them. On March 31, Frank Longwell came over with his power 
saw and helped clear the driveway enough so I could get the car out. The 
day before, John Bumbalo had taken me back and forth to the hospital. 
(Jane now has over $7000 in donations through Maude Cardwell's 
efforts in Reality Change. 
*In Jane/Seth's The Individual and the Nature of Mass Events, which was published in 1981,1 wrote: "Seth maintains that Framework 2, or inner reality, contains 
the creative source from which we form all events, and that by the proper focusing 
of attention we can draw from that vast subjective medium everything we need for a 
constructive, positive life in Framework 1, or physical reality." Seth has a lot to say 
about Frameworks 1 and 2 in Mass Events. For example: "Those unique intents that 
characterize each individual exist first in Framework 2, then — and with birth, 
those intents immediately begin to impress the physical world of Framework 1." 
• 160TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
(Jane did very well today, reading the last session, plus the one for 
March 19, which Seth wants her to review every so often. 
(Her Seth voice was quite good, although she used a number of long 
pauses.) 
Now — I bid you another fond good afternoon — 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
— and we will resume dictation. 
There are many large issues that touch upon the circumstances 
involving the health of individuals, and these concern questions that 
we have not yet discussed. 
They will indeed be covered later in this book, but for now we 
will only be concerned with them in a general way. They are more 
divorced from ordinary medical thought, and would indeed be considered sheer quackery in the majority of medical circles. 
The fact is that each individual lives many lives, and that the 
inner self is quite aware of its own spiritual and physical dexterity. 
The body consciousness alone understands that its physical existence in any one life is dependent upon its physical death — and 
that that death will assure it of still another existence. The "drive for 
survival" is, therefore, a drive that leads Jo death and beyond it, for 
all of consciousness understands that it survives through many forms 
and conditions. 
Reincarnation, therefore, also is part of the larger framework in 
which any individual's health and well-being must be considered. 
The reincarnational influences are most apparent in what would be 
considered bodily defects dating from birth, and these will be discussed later on in this book. 
Reincarnational influences are not nearly as rigid as many believers in the concept think. That is, reincarnational influences usually 
leave many options open to an individual in any case. It is quite simplistic, for example, to say, as some people do, that any given particular event from a past life leads inevitably to a particularly matching 
effect in a present one. There are too many other elements that also 
apply to the human personality. No one is "fated" to have bad health. 
No one is punished in one life for "evil" activities in a previous one. 
A person who has been cruel in one life may choose to experience conditions in the next life in which he or she understands the 
THE BROKEN-HEARTED. THE HEARTLESS 
• 161 • 
meaning of cruelty, but this does not mean that such a person would 
then necessarily experience an entire lifetime as a victim. 
New learning would always be involved, and thus new options 
would always be open. There are, in fact, so many distorted ideas 
connected with the concept of reincarnation in general, that I think 
it far better to simply concentrate upon the idea of multiple existences. Period. Because of the true nature of time, and the interrelationships of consciousness, a future life affects a past one, for in 
actuality all of these existences happen simultaneously. All systems 
are open-ended, particularly psychological ones. In greater terms, 
you are working "at all levels" and at all of your own existences at 
once, even though it is useful sometimes to think of reincarnation as 
a series of lives, one after the other. 
End of dictation. 
(4:22.) You are indeed beneficially impressing reality at a Framework 2 level, and in ways that are becoming apparent at all of the 
normal levels of your individual and joint experience. 
I do activate those coordinates that quicken the healing 
processes, and foster feelings of well-being and exuberance. 
("Thank you." 
(4:24 P.M. I read the session to Jane. While I did she had some thoughts 
of her own — that a person can choose illness, for example, in order to 
explore that reality, and to exert certain effects upon others around the ill 
person: thoughts I have hacl many times — my old idea of consciousness 
getting to know itself in as many ways as possible. 
(She also had the idea that in our society we're so educated and used to 
condemning ourselves if we have any thing urrong with us, that we blind 
ourselves to the real reasons we fall ill to begin with. Another idea I've 
mused about. I'm afraid I think that consciously we're a long ways from 
incorporating such ideas into our daily society. 
(Jane added that when she listens to me read a session to her, she'll get 
glimpses from Seth sometimes of tvhal he's going to say next time: "The 
thoughts are mine, but also a mixture, they have a tinge of Seth's ideas." 
She thinks that such was the case today. 
(When I askecl her if she believed we were operating within Framework 
2, she said she did — that the insurance questions, the donations, and our 
current work, all show that toe are doing things much belter — and I agree. 
• JLDS • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
(Jane called, with Carta's help, at 9:45 P.M., just as I finished typing 
this session.) 
APRIL 3,1984 
4:03 P.M. TUESDAY 
(The day was warm — 50 degrees. 
(Jane did very well reading aloud the first two notes Fd written for Session 907 of Dreams, as well as yesterday's session. In fact, her reading of 
the session was as fast, or faster, than any I've heard her do. Peggy Gallagher visited briefly in the middle of Jane's effort.) 
Now — I bid you another most fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
We will resume dictation. 
The concept of the survival of the fittest has had a considerably 
detrimental effect in many areas of human activity — particularly in 
the realm of medical ideology and practice. 
The whole idea was developed in the most mechanistic of terms, 
stressing competition among all aspects of life, pitting one life form 
against another, and using physical strength and dexterity, swiftness 
and efficiency, as the prime conditions for the survival of any individual or species. 
It is quite true, however, that in the wild many animals protect 
and provide for wounded or disabled members, and that the wisdom 
that comes with age is indeed appreciated even in the animal kingdom. The survival of the fittest concept, however, has been exaggerated far above those of cooperation. 
(Longpause at 4:12.) Politically as well as medically, such distortions have led to unfortunate conditions: the Aryan-supremacy biological ideas fostered in the second world war, the concentration 
upon "the perfect body," and other distortions. The idea of the ideal 
body has often been held up to the populace at large, and this often 
sets forth a stylized "perfect" physique that actually could be matched 
by few individuals. Any variations are frowned upon, and any birth 
defects considered in the most suspicious of lights. Some schools of 
thought, then, have it that only the genetically superior should be 
allowed to reproduce, and there are scientists who believe that all 
defects can be eradicated through judicious genetic planning. 
THE BROKEN-HEARTED. THE HEARTLESS 
• 163 • 
As a result of such long-held theories, people have grown distrustful of their own bodies. The handicapped are often given messages, even by the medical profession, that make them feel like 
misfits, unworthy to survive. When people become ill, they often 
blame themselves in such a way that unnecessary guilt is the result. 
In the past some religious groups have also promoted beliefs that 
illness is a sign of God's punishment, or vengeance for sins committed against his "goodness." 
The same beliefs often spread to economic areas in which (long 
pause) people who met pleasure in God's eyes were therefore gifted 
with wealth and prosperity, as well as good health. Therefore God 
was seen to be on the side of those who competed most strenuously, 
so that to be poor or sick was almost seen as a sign of God's disfavor. 
All such concepts appear in one form or another at most official 
levels of thought and education. The whole idea of the esthetics of 
nature is forgotten — a subject that we will touch upon further as we 
continue our discussion. 
(Heartily:) End of session. A fond good afternoon. 
(4:40 P.M. "Good afternoon, Seth, Thank you.") 
APRIL 4,1984 
4:14 P.M. WEDNESDAY 
(This noon Frank Longwell visited briefly, and agreed to take down the 
damaged Chinese elms in the back yard, till the soil, and put in wild flowers. I told Jane about the plan and she more or less likes it, although she 
mourns the loss of the trees. *Maybe you can keep the sawed-off trunks in 
place to make bird feeders," she said. 
(After lunch Jane read yesterday's session very well. The heat isn 9t working in 330 and ive waited most of the afternoon for service.) 
Now — I bid you another fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
We will resume dictation. 
This chapter consists of a potpovirri of different ideas — merely to 
hint at the multitudinous issues connected with health and well-being. 
(Long pause.) Your ideas about yourself are, again, vital in the 
larger context of a healthy lifetime. The condition of your heart is 
affected, for example, by your own feelings about it. If you consider 
• 164TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
yourself to be coldhearted, or heartless, those feelings will have a significant effect upon that physical organ. If you feel broken-hearted, 
then you will also have that feeling reflected in one way or another 
in the physical organ itself. 
Obviously, as I mentioned earlier, each individual also has many 
options open. Everyone who feels brokenhearted does not die of 
heart failure, for example. The subject of health cannot be considered in an isolated fashion, but must be seen in that greater context 
that gives health itself a value and a meaning. As mentioned earlier, 
each person will also try to fulfill their own unique abilities, and to 
"fill out" the experience of life as fully as possible. 
If an individual is hampered in that attempt strongly and persistently enough, then the dissatisfaction and frustration will be translated into a lack of physical exuberance and vitality. There is always 
an unending reservoir of energy at the command of each person, 
however, regardless of circumstances, and we will also discuss the 
ways in which you can learn to tap that source and better your own 
health situation. 
(Pause at 4:25.) The sooner you can rid yourself of rigid beliefs 
about the survival of the fittest, the better you will be. All philosophies that stress the idea of the body's impurity or degradation 
should also be seen as detrimental to bodily and spiritual integrity. 
Such beliefs clutter up your conscious mind with negative suggestions that can only frighten the exterior ego and impede the great 
strength and vitality that is your heritage from lending you the fullest 
possible strength and support. 
Later on we will indeed discuss various methods of healing, conventional and unconventional. Medical technology alone, however 
expert, cannot really heal a broken heart, of course. Such a healing 
can only take place through understanding and through expressions 
of love. In other words, through emotional transplants rather than 
physical ones alone. The emotional factors are extremely vital, both 
in the development and in the healing of all dis-hyphen-eases. 
We will not stress particular diseases in this book, and mention 
symptoms only to identify the cases associated with such conditions. 
It is actually far more important that we stress the symptoms of 
health and those methods, beliefs, and healings that promote them. 
THE BROKEN-HEARTED. THE HEARTLESS 
• 165 • 
End of session. I bid you a fond good afternoon — and I have 
activated those conditions and coordinates that quicken a sense of 
well-being and exuberance. 
(4:37P.M. 
"Thankyou.'9) 
APRIL 6,1984 
4:13 P.M. FRIDAY 
(Jane called last night. I ivorked on Dreams but an hour this morning, 
and once again, told her that I was concerned about lost working time on 
the book. She said she9d been very blue as I left last night, but that the period 
had passed after a ivhile and she9d felt fine. Tve also had a number of blue 
periods lately, but try to keep going anyhow.) 
Now: I bid you another fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.99) 
It is natural enough in your situation to have blue periods now 
and then. 
(Long pause.) These can often serve as springboards, however, 
leading to greater understanding, and the feelings themselves do 
indeed help rid you of fears and doubts that are expressed through 
such a medium. I am sure that I mentioned this before, but I wanted 
to refresh your memory, and this applies, generally speaking, to all 
individuals. It is far better to express those feelings than to inhibit 
them. 
At the same time, you both should — and do — try to turn your 
minds in other directions, so that the periods do not linger. Generally speaking, you have handled such situations well, and what I said 
about your activities in Framework 2 does still apply. 
This will also be reflected in your concerns with books and [your 
publisher] Prentice-Hall — with any of your business concerns. It is 
a good idea, then, to remember that regardless of appearances at 
any given time, those issues are being settled to your satisfaction. 
Your letters have an effect, whether or not it seems that any given 
questions are being answered. 
I bid you now a most fond good afternoon, and I do activate 
those coordinates that quicken healing, well-being, and exuberance. 
("Good afternoon, Seth. Thank you.99 
• 166TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
(4:20 P.M. "7 had the feeling it would be for us, instead of dictation," 
Jane said. I read the session to her. "That last part ought to make you feel 
better," she saicl. "Does it?" 
(I had to stop and think, since I've been pretty angry and upset about 
communications with Prentice-Hall lately. "It's surprising," I said, meaning Seth's comments about our doing well in Framework 2, including the 
publishing angle. uI didn 9t think I was doing that well." I guess I still 
don% but we9U see. 
(I told Jane Fd hacl another one of those long, involved, being-pursued 
dreams last night, this time involving my brother, Linden, who is 13 
months younger than I am. I can recall little of it. It worked out okay, yet it 
reflected my state of mind often these days — my fears, probably on a lot of 
subjects. 
(I do think Seth offered an excellent insight when he said that the blue 
periods on both our parts were ways of expressing fears. Without thinking 
about such bouts particularly, I suppose I at leas t had taken it for gran ted 
that the blue periods reflected weaknesses on my part, say — times when I 
should have known better or wasn 9t doing well. I dare say Jane has the same 
ideas. Now we can appreciate that the blue periods are therapeutic. 
(I went shopping at SuperDuper on the way home tonight, and ate a late 
supper. Jane called ivith Carta's help at 9:50, as I was typing this session. 
I love you, Jane.) 
CHAPTER 5 
SUGGESTION AND HEALTH 
APRIL 8,1984 
4:30 P.M. SUNDAY 
a
arte was upset when I got to 330 this noon. Jeff Karder, her doctor, had 
been in. At first she didn't toant to tell me what he'd said until after 
lunch, but I persuaded her to tell all One of the nurses had evidently told 
Jeff that the open sores on Jane's right knee were draining. He told Jane that 
there could be an infection there, at the site of perhaps a bone spur — he 
wasn't sure. Jeff added that a small operation might fix it, or that perhaps 
nothing need be done. 
("Well, that wasn't so bad, was it?" I asked my wife when she'd finished. Jane seemed to take it well, and recovered okay, I thought. 
(I'd brought in Chapter 6 of Dreams, which I'd finished typing this 
morning, and ended up reading the whole thing to Jane except for a couple 
of notes. I had the time, being caught up on correspondence again. She 
liked the whole thing. She had the same feeling I'd noticed when reading sessions one hadn't seen for several years: that it was all brand new, and surprising, as though someone else had produced the work. I told her at the end 
of the day that the Seth material is an excellent example of her own direct 
cognition; this obvious description had come to me after I worked with Seth's 
material on direct cognition in Chapter 6 of Dreams. A very good point, 
though, and one I want to add a note on for the chapter. 
. ion . 
• 168TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
(It was so late when I finished reading Chapter 6 to her that Jane 
wasn't planning on a session today, until I told her it was okay with me.) 
Now I bid you another fond good afternoon — 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
— and we will resume dictation, with a new chapter, to be called: 
"Suggestion and Health." 
(Jane had received this title yesterday, and told me.) 
Suggestions are usually statements directed toward a particular 
action or hypothesis. To a large extent, suggestions are tied into conscious thought processes, following the dictates of reason. For example: "If thus and thus be so, then thus and thus must follow." There is 
no magic connected with suggestions — but repeated often enough, 
and believed in fervently, such suggestions do indeed take on a 
deeply habitual nature. They are no longer examined, but taken for 
literal truth. 
(Longpause.) They are then handed over to the more automatic 
levels of personality, where they trigger the specific actions that are 
so strongly implied. Many such suggestions are "old-hat idioms." 
They belong to the past, and again they escape the questioning and 
examination that are usually given to new ideas. Period. 
These suggestions may be remarkably long-standing, therefore, 
and consist of beliefs received in childhood. Period. Accepted now in 
the present, noncritically, they may still affect health and well-being. 
Such suggestions can be beneficial and supportive, or negative and 
detrimental. Here are some examples that should be quite familiar 
to many people. They consist of suggestions given to children: 
"If you go out in the rain without your rubbers, you will catch cold." 
"If you are too talkative or demonstrative, people will not like you." 
"If you run you will fall down." 
There are many variations, of course, such as: "If you go out in 
rainy weather, you'll get pneumonia," or: "If you tell a lie your 
tongue will turn to stone." 
These suggestions and others like them are often given to children by their parents with the best of intentions. When they are 
young, the offspring will accept some such suggestions uncritically, 
coming as they do from a revered adult, so that the suggestions are 
almost interpreted as commands. 
SUGGESTION AND HEALTH 
• 169 • 
A suggestion like: "If you go swimming too soon after lunch, you 
will drown," is extremely dangerous, for it predicts behavior of a disastrous nature that would follow almost automatically after the first 
act is performed. Obviously, children who go into the water right 
after eating do not all drown. The suggestion itself can lead to all 
kinds of nervous symptoms, however — panics, 
or stomach 
cramps — that can persist well into adulthood. 
Such suggestions can be removed, as we will explain shortly. 
(4:47.) There are other kinds of suggestions that involve identification. A child may be told: 'You are just like your mother; she was 
always nervous and moody." Or: 'You are fat because your father 
was fat." 
These are all statements leading toward a certain hypothesis. 
Again, the problem is that often the hypotheses remain unquestioned. You end up with structured beliefs unexamined, that are 
then automatically acted upon. 
End of dictation. 
(4:50.) Tell Ruburt not to worry. The leg question will work out, 
and without a needed operation. 
I bid you both a fond good afternoon, having activated those 
coordinates that quicken your individual and joint well-being and 
healing qualities. 
("Thank you." 4:52 P.M.) 
APRIL 9,1984 
4:01 P.M. MONDAY 
(I discovered considerable drainage on the foam rubber buffer between 
Jane's knees when I got to 330 this noon, and turned her on her back. 
(At 2:50 Dr. Wilson, whom Jane likes, came in to examine the knee. He 
said apart of the bone at the break site, had become infected, and probably 
had been for a long time. It might go away, he said, as it evidently had once 
before when the ulcer there had healed. He agreed with us that it was okay 
to leave the area uncovered and free of cream, since it's thoroughly washed 
each day in hydro. He didn't advocate doing anything like an operation, 
and his advice was consistent with Seth's material yesterday. He'll check on 
the knee, he said. 
• JLDS • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
(Jane said my parting words yesterday, that she shouldn't worry, that 
the leg will work itself out fine, cheered her quite a bit. I meant it, and repeat 
it now once again. 
(At 3:15 she tried to read yesterday's session. She didn't do well, 
though, and I read it to her finally.) 
Now — I bid you another most fond good afternoon — 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
— and we will continue dictation. 
The suggestions we have given so far are predictives; they actually predict dire events of one kind or another, following a given 
original action. 
There are many of these, dealing particularly with age also. Many 
people believe fervently that with approaching age they will meet a 
steady, disastrous deterioration in which the senses and the mind will 
be dull, and the body, stricken with disease, will lose all of its vigor 
and agility. Many young people believe such nonsense, and therefore they set themselves up to meet the very conditions they so fear. 
The mind grows wiser with age when it is allowed to do so. There 
is even an acceleration of thought and inspiration, much like that 
experienced in the adolescent years, that suddenly brings a new 
understanding to the aged individual, and provides an impetus that 
should help the person to achieve greater comprehension — a comprehension that should quell all fears of death. 
(4:08. Shannon took Jane's blood pressure. 1 read the session so far to 
Jane. At 4:13 Jane resumed with material she'd told me yesterday that Seth 
planned to cover today.) 
Thoughts and beliefs do indeed bring about physical alterations. 
They can even — and often do — change genetic messages. 
There are diseases that people believe are inherited, carried 
from one generation to another by a faulty genetic communication. 
Obviously, many people with, for example, a genetic heritage of 
arthritis do not come down with the disease themselves, while others 
indeed are so afflicted. The difference is one of belief. 
The people who have accepted the suggestion uncritically that 
they will inherit such a malady do then seem to inherit it: they experience the symptoms. Actually, the belief itself may have changed a 
healthy genetic message into an unhealthy one. Ideally, a change of 
belief would remedy the situation. 
SUGGESTION AND HEALTH 
• 171 • 
People are not simply swung willy-nilly by one negative suggestion or another, however. Each person has an entire body of beliefs 
and suggestions — and these are quite literally reflected in the physical body itself. 
(4:19. Dana took Jane's temperature. I read Jane the last few lines.) 
All practical healing deals with the insertion of positive suggestions and the removal of negative ones. As we mentioned earlier, each 
smallest atom or cell contains its own impetus toward growth and 
value fulfillment. In other words, they are literally implanted with 
positive suggestions, biologically nurtured, so to that extent it is true 
to say that in a certain fashion negative suggestions are unnatural, 
leading away from life's primary goals. Negative suggestions could be 
compared to static sounding on an otherwise clear program. 
End of dictation. 
I bid you both another fond good afternoon, and I have indeed 
quickened those coordinates that lead to healing and well-being. 
("Thank you.") 
I am, of course, very pleased with your work on Dreams, and with 
the notes that you read yesterday. I take it for granted that you do 
understand my appreciation. 
("Yes. Thank you." 
(4:28 P.M. I read the session to Jane. "As you read that I again got 
what was coming up tomorrow," she said. "About the confusion that comes 
when you start trying to change beliefs, 'cause they 're all raveled in together. 
But that's not right either," she added, meaning there was much more to be 
learned.) 
APRIL 10,1984 
3:55 P.M. TUESDAY 
(The day was warmer — over 50 degrees as I drove down to 330. Jane 
looked good. Not much drainage from her right knee. Georgia was taking 
care of her today; she washed Jane's hair this morning. The nurses and 
aides on the floor are full of hell today, telling explicit sexual jokes and playing tricks on one another. 
(Jane described a very vivid and even exhilarating dream she'd had 
last night, in which she'd been playing with her own collection of trinkets, 
sitting on the floor, and so forth. I neglected to note down the details. Jane 
• 172TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
said she was really enjoying the dream, after supper, when Debbie Harris 
arrived far a visit and woke her up. 
(Jane read yesterday's session, but found lots of it hard going. She did 
better toward the end, though, after several attempts, then did very well 
indeed reading rapidly through her favorite session — and mine — for 
March 19.) 
Now, I bid you another most fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
We will resume dictation. 
Worry, fear, and doubt are detrimental to good health, of course, 
and these are very often caused by the officially held beliefs of society. 
Those beliefs paint a dire picture, in which any given situation is 
bound to deteriorate. Any conceivable illness will worsen, and any 
possible catastrophe be encountered. 
Such beliefs discourage feelings of curiosity, joy, or wonder. They 
inhibit playful activity or spontaneous behavior. They cause a physical situation in which the body is placed in a state of defensive 
aggression. Under such conditions it seems only rational to look for 
the worm in the apple, so to speak, and to expect pain or danger in 
each new experience or encounter. 
Play is a very important — indeed, vital — attribute in the development of growth and fulfillment. Children play naturally, and so do 
animals. For that matter, insects, birds, fish, and all kinds of life play. 
Even ants and honeybees play. Their sociability is not just a matter of 
constant work within a hive or an ant mound. This playful activity is, 
in fact, the basis for their organized behavior, and they "play" at 
adult behavior before they assume their own duties. 
Creatures play because the activity is joyful, and spontaneous 
and beneficial, because it activates all portions of the organism — 
and again, in play youngsters imitate adult patterns of operation that 
lead finally to their own mature activity. 
(5:09.) When people become ill, worried or fearful, one of the 
first symptoms of trouble is a lack of pleasure, a gradual discontinuance of playful action, and an over-concentration upon personal 
problems. In other words, illness is often first marked by a lack of 
zest or exuberance. 
This retreat from pleasure begins to cut down upon normal 
activity, new encounters, or explorations that might in themselves 
SUGGESTION AND HEALTH 
• 173 • 
help relieve the problem by opening up new options. Such a person 
becomes dejected looking — unsmiling and somber, leading others 
to comment upon such a dejected countenance. Comments such as 
these: 'You look tired," or: "What's the matter, don't you feel well?" 
and other such remarks often simply reinforce the individual's earlier sense of dejection, until finally this same kind of give-and-take 
leads to a situation in which the individual and his fellows begin to 
intermix in a negative rather than a positive manner. 
I do not mean to imply that it is always detrimental to make such 
queries as "Are you ill?" or "Are you tired?" Such questions do 
indeed predict their own answers. When a person is feeling in good 
health, exuberant and alive, such queries will be nonchalantly 
shoved aside — they will have no effect whatsoever. But constant 
questions of such a nature do not help an individual who is having 
difficulties — and in fact too frequent expressions of compassion 
can also worsen a person's state of mind, stressing the idea that he 
or she must be very ill indeed to attract such feelings of compassion. 
It is far better, then, to make no comment at all under such conditions. (Long pause.) I am not speaking of genuine questions of concern so much as rather automatic, unthinking, negative comments. 
Period. 
On the other hand, it is an excellent practice to comment upon 
another individual's obvious zest or energy or good spirits. In such a 
way, you reward positive behavior, and may indeed begin a chain of 
positive activity instead of continuing a chain of negative reactions. 
End of session. 
Ruburt's dream was excellent, showing that he is now making the 
best of his past, rediscovering playful beliefs — the trinkets — and 
sources of pleasure and activity. Again, I quicken those coordinates 
that promote health and well-being. 
("It's me,"Jane said. 
("Thank you." 
(5:30 P.M. Jane had been interrupted at 4:14 by a nurse bringing 
vitamin C; then Fd read my wife what she'd delivered on the session so 
far. Now, after today's session I read the first session for Chapter 1 of 
Dreams to her. I got the idea of reading the whole book to her because of her 
excellent response the other day when Fd read her Chapter 5. Again, today, 
she was quite impressed with that first session. uI think it important that 
• 1 7 4 TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
you know what a great job you did on that book, "I said. It's incredible to us 
that she gave that first session in September 1979, some four and a half 
years ago.) 
APRIL 12,1984 
4:13 P.M. THURSDAY 
(Jane called last nigh t. The temperature ivas 60 degrees when I left for 
330. Leaving the house, I picked up from the mailbox some $360 in contributions sent to us by Maude Cardwell. This morning I finished marking 
Dreams for the publisher. 
(Fm beginning to get that harried'feeling again, especially since 
another batch of mail arrived from Prentice-Hall today. Some of my teeth 
bother me at times, and tonight the pendulum told me they do so because Fm 
toorrying about Jane. 
(I stopped at a Convenient Market to buy potato chips to contribute to 
a party the staff is giving for one of the aides who's changing jobs at the hospital. Carta saved me a pla te of food from the party, and I brough t it home 
for supper. Very good. It was after 9:10 P.M. before I began typing this session. 
(It was quite warm in 330 this afternoon, and Jane was often uncomfortable.) 
Now — I bid you another fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
We will resume dictation. 
I am not telling you to gush out a steady stream of positive suggestions, whether or not they bear any relation to the situation at hand. 
I ana saying that it is far better to look on the most hoped-for 
solution to any situation, and to voice that attitude rather than to 
expect the poorest outcome, or express the most dire of attitudes. 
(Longpause.) There are some issues highly vital to health and happiness, that are quite difficult to describe. They are felt intrinsically. 
They are a part of the esthetics of nature itself. Flowers are not just 
brightly colored for man's enjoyment, for example, but because 
color is a part of the flowers' own esthetic system. They enjoy their 
own brilliance, and luxuriate in their own multitudinous hues. 
(4:20.) The insects also appreciate flowers' profusion of color, 
and also for esthetic reasons. I am saying, therefore that even insects 
have an esthetic sense, and again, that each creature, and each plant, 
SUGGESTION AND HEALTH 
• 175 • 
or natural entity, has its own sense of value fulfillment, seeking the 
greatest possible fulfillment and extension of its own innate abilities. 
This sense of value fulfillment, once more, benefits not only the 
individual, but its species and all other species. In a manner of speaking, then, the picture of nature is painted by its own consciously vital, 
esthetic portions. Each portion of nature is also equipped to react to 
changing conditions, and therefore deals with its own kind of predictive behavior, so that it can grow today into tomorrow's condition. 
Nature always works with probabilities. In human terms, this 
means that each person has a vast bank of avenues that lead to value 
fulfillment, and that individual abilities will ideally form their own 
boulevards of expression. 
Poor health, or simply unhappy situations, arise only when the 
individual meets too many detours, or encounters too many blocks 
to the expression of value fulfillment. 
End of dictation. 
(4:30.) Once again, I activate those coordinates that quicken 
healing and well-being. 
(Long pause, eyes closed. "Well, I guess that's it,"Jane said. 
(4:31. "Okay." I read the session to Jane after giving her a drink of 
water and lighting a smoke for her. "You ought to make a note," she said, 
"that because of our conditions in the hospital the sessions are a lot shorter. 
We have so many things to do, turning me over, feeding me, eating at a 
decent lime so you can get home at a decent hour and have supper — " 
(1 said that the near-daily routine of sessions probably compensated for 
their brevity — but also that we let much time go by that we could use for 
sessions. "Right noiu, for instance," I said, "we're alone and no one's bothering us. You could go on for a little while longer." 
(4:39.) Resume dictation. 
With man's own exteriorized ego, this leads to the question of 
free will and the making of conscious choices. 
The human individual is aware of large numbers of probable 
activities. Each individual person literally possesses far more abilities 
than can be adequately expressed in any given lifetime. This insures 
a large profusion of possible actions from which the individual can 
draw according to changing circumstances. 
Each person can also intrinsically sense the direction in which he 
or she is most inclined. Inspiration will send nudges towards certain 
• 176TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
activities. It will be easier and more delightful for each person to 
move and grow in certain directions, rather than others. 
In this discussion, I am not merely speaking in terms of exterior 
accomplishments, or goals, though these are important. Many 
people, however, will find they have a natural knack for relationships 
with others, in which the known value cannot be easily judged, as it 
can, say, in the works of an artist or writer. 
Instead, such people will indeed perform a kind of artistry of 
relationships, composing, say, symphonic, emotional compositions 
that indeed play as masterfully upon the emotions as the pianist 
upon the keys. By looking at your own life, you can quite easily discover in what areas your own abilities lie by following the shape of 
your own impulses and inclinations. You cannot learn about yourself 
by studying what is expected of you by others — but only by asking 
yourself what you expect of yourself, and discovering for yourself in 
what direction your abilities lie. 
End of dictation again. 
("Thank you." 
(4:56P.M. "Boy, am I sweating,"Jane said. The windows were wide 
open. I should have added that before the session Jane finally got through 
the session for March 19 by herself, after some hard going, and that I had 
to finish reading the last session to her myself. 
(At her suggestion I'd brought in her old wire-frame glasses, but they 
didn't seem to make much difference. They looked good on her.) 
APRIL 17,1984 
3:58 P.M. TUESDAY 
(This is Jane's first session in five days — her longest recent break. 
(Jane's been pretty blue lately, wondering whether she'll ever get home 
again. I said I didn't know how she would — or could — at this time. It's 
been very nearly a year — April 20. We had a discussion that wasn't very 
cheerful or helpful, and covered a lot of ground that we'd traversed before. I 
repeated my old comments that I'd have been more than willing to chuck the 
whole psychic bit years ago, if she wanted to, for I'd seen signs of trouble way 
back when she was producing Seth Speaks. If the psychic ivork was at the 
base of her troubles — which I didn't really believe, and still don't. 
SUGGESTION AND HEALTH 
• 177 • 
(I think that whatever fears of life Jane has are the result of conditioning early in life, and that they have successfully resisted all attempts to dig 
them out My saying that such a course of bodily harm is pointless is beside 
the point, when one considers how deeply they have ruled Jane for many 
years. I told her I think the Seth material touches upon those fears, but 
doesn't eradicate their emotional content and force. I don't know how to 
help her any more. I myself have had little hope since last year, following her 
burst of motion beginning in October, 1983. When I saiv that she was 
giving up on those movements after a couple of months, I took it as another 
sign of resistance on the part of deeply en trenched parts of the personality. 
(Then there followed the round of infections, the antibiotics, the broken 
leg opening up, and so forth, and to me these meant that she had little hope 
herself. But more importantly, that they, loo, reflected a dogged resistance to 
change on her part — of certain portions of the personality, that is. I 
cannot conceive of my wife's situation being otherwise. Her body has not 
been given permission to heal itself, otherwise it would be doing so. It has 
that potential, undoubtedly. When Seth began saying that Jane would 
resume walking in reasonable comfort, I at first believed him, but soon came 
to not believe him, for I saiv no sign of such a change even beginning. 
Instead I saw the fevers and infections, and realized that those events meant 
the time for healing and walking was not now. 
(My own position may be too simple, but I do not believe a body can be 
coaxed to good health by others, or sessions, or wha tever. I told Jane that if 
she ever improves, i t will be because certain parts of her give permission. She 
said through tears that she wants to get well, but that meant little to me, I'm 
afraid, since her state flatly contradicts such protestations. I also said that 
on a larger, more inclusive scale I can understand a person choosing a life 
of illness, say, in order to learn and to explore consciousness in certain 
ways. I think this is what she has chosen to do so far in life. In ordinary 
terms her behavior is an extreme — and I added that when I asked Seth 
about this, he countered by talking about the extremes of poverty in Africa, 
say, but he said precious little about Jane per se. I took that as another sign 
of resistance. Nor did Jane ever return to the subject. I concluded that my 
asking questions was a waste of time, and stopped doing so. I have no plans 
to resume, for I always ended up feeling that without my pushing, Jane — 
either with or without Seth —just would never deal with them. And that's 
been the case. Most of the private sessions we have in those 40 loose-leaf 
• 178TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
notebooks, about her symptoms, are the result of my pushing herfor answers, 
not the other way around. 
(Jane's Seth voice today was quiet, and I hacl to listen in competition 
with noises outside and in the halls.) 
Now I bid you another fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
This is not book dictation. 
(Long pause.) I will try to clear up several important issues. Of 
course, on one level Ruburt wants to be home, and you want him 
home also. On another level, he is afraid of going home, thinking it 
almost impossible under current conditions. This applies to you also. 
He is afraid of going home because of current conditions — but 
that fear also prolongs current conditions. To some extent or 
another, you have both been afraid of making any plans at all concerning Ruburt's return home, because they seem impractical at the 
present time. Both of you do indeed think in terms of impediments 
that do indeed seem all too real: the responsibility of maintaining 
good health, the financial question — and on Ruburt's part, at least, 
the fear that he would not recover fully enough, but become ill again 
and require hospital attention once more. 
In this confusion of thoughts and fears, the goal of Ruburt's 
recovery, or even of a considerable improvement within a foreseeable period of time, is lost. You have to eradicate as much of that fear 
and confusion as possible. See the goal as certainly possible. Begin to 
consider plans — for the plans themselves will help Ruburt's condition improve, and will begin to diminish those impediments that 
now loom so large in both of your minds. 
I may or may not return this afternoon. I am doing my best, 
giving what information I can, at any rate. Take a break. 
(uThat's it, right at this minute, "Jane said. 
(4:08 P.M. I read the session to Jane. Seth obviously didn't return. 
(The session reinforced much of what I wrote in my notes before it was 
held — that fear rules, and whether by choice or not, has for many years. 
But then, ultimately it hacl to be chosen. I found myself thinking as the session progressed that what's needed is not the allaying of any current fears 
about going home, but the more basic ones that are "responsible" fvr the 
whole situation to begin with. Then the current fears would melt away, I 
SUGGESTION AND HEALTH 
• 179 • 
ithink. I even think that when Seth told Jane a few weeks ago that her broken 
right leg could straighten itself out, this generated more fears right there — 
that it couldn't do so, and so forth. I also think that when an individual 
wants protection or shielding from the world badly enough, he or she will go 
to any length to get it.) 
APRIL 18,1984 
4:50 P.M. WEDNESDAY 
(Jane dicln 'I call last night. This morning 1 took the cats to the vet, with 
far less trouble than I had feared. Yet last night I'd slept poorly, waking up 
to wonder how I'd make out trying to get them into the carriers for the journey to the veterinarian in Horseheads, which is a small community very 
close to Elmira. To me, they already seem better tonight, although they've 
each had but one pill for the itching. 
(At 11 P.M, as I was about to begin copying checks from Maude Cardwell, Frank Longwell visited, and we talked about how to fix the back yard 
when the trees are gone. Now tomorrow I should take the lawnmower in to 
get that put in shape, for the grass is turning green and soon will be growing. I haven't worked on Dreams for what seems like days. 
(Jane seemed somewhat subdued, although she ate well. We discussed 
yesterday's session. She tried to read it while I did mail, but I ended up reading most of it to her. I'd feared it was loo harsh, but as I read aloud I did 
see that it expressed my thinking. Jane seemed to agree with the thesis that 
basically a deep fear is in back of her troubles, and we went over some of the 
same ground we'd covered yesterday. She suggested trying dream suggestion 
to get clues as to the root causes of her fears, and I said that that was a good 
approach. 
(Another approach we want to try is to play the tape a friend had sent 
us several months ago — a reading by someone whom he considers gifted 
psychically. Jane is now ready to listen to the tape, and so am I. Last night 
I couldn 'tfind the tape, but now I did, just before beginning to type this session. So tomorrow I take the tape and recorder in to 330. 
(So much time passed this afternoon that I thought Jane had passed up 
a session, but finally, after ive'd talked some more, she said she wanted to 
have a short one. She'd become upset as the time passed, for our conversations more and more stressed the fact, without our overtly laboring the point, 
• 180TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
that our situation is, in our minds at least, rather hopeless. She didn't know 
whether she could have the session, or dredge up anything that might help. 
(The day ivas warm and rainy at times, and the windows were wide 
open. Once again, her Seth voice was quiet, and I had to pay close attention 
to hear it competing with other hospital sounds. This time, also, however, 
her delivery varied in a strange way, seeming to ride rhy thms of emotion 
and resolve by turn. She took many long pauses, and sighed at times while 
speaking for Seth. I thought several times that she might stop speaking in 
mid-delivery, but she kept going. At a few spots I felt the tears in her voice, 
and that they were very close to breaking through.) 
Now — I bid you a most fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
This session is obviously in response to this afternoon's troublesome discussion. 
It is imperative that both of you realize that Ruburt's body has 
been constantly healing itself, though not with the thoroughness 
that you both desire. Otherwise it seems to him as if he is a physical 
failure in that regard. (Longpause.) He has not been as successful as 
he would wish — but even when fears brought about complications, 
the body has been successful in many ways in countering these. 
At one level Ruburt did allow himself to participate in a very difficult health situation. There were many questions he asked himself 
about his mother's condition in particular (Marie is a bedridden 
arthritic), and about such situations in general, and he did indeed 
allow himself to go along on one level to provide an extraordinary 
impetus that he felt would be needed to conquer svich extraordinary 
conditions. 
The entire question is a deeply creative one, bringing about 
insights that he felt were highly vital. He felt himself adequate to the 
task. On the other hand, on the more usually understood human 
level, he also became extremely frightened. 
(Long pause at 5:00.) I will have to take a break. I do not know 
whether or not he will continue today, for it is a hard session for 
Ruburt to give, while maintaining the necessary trance level. 
(5:01 P.M. I could tell the session was a difficult one forJane, especially 
when her voice wavered, and she almost halted her delivery several times. 
She said so too. "Yeah," I said, "but how tough can a session be, compared 
SUGGESTION AND HEALTH 
• 181 • 
to your daily situation laying in bed in the hospital? That's a lot worse. 
This session might lead to something important." 
(I didn't say so because the time was speeding past and Ifelt dead tired 
myself but the session seemed to offer some glimmers of hope. Earlier today 
Jane had remarked several times that on April 20th she'll have been in the 
hospital a year, and she didn't see how she was ever going to get out. 
(My personal opinion, which I haven't even had the lime to discuss 
with her, is that she ought to continue sessions in this vein, no matter how 
difficult they may be, simply to break the chains that keep her bedridden and 
hospitalized. Surely that goal makes them worth it. Earlier this afternoon 
I'd repeated my own grim assertion that putting oneself in Jane's condition 
because of a fear of others, or the world at large, was untenable, and that 
I'd never stand for it. I asked her if she'd done enough of that herself after 
the session, and she said she was ready to change. We'll see. At least Ifeel a 
small hope. 
(And it's also obvious, I want to note, that we're both aware that in certain ways Jane's body is healing itself. If it didn't it would die. The point is 
that the healing we want, or a reasonable facsimile thereof, has to come from 
a deeper understanding and encounter with those powerful forces that 
brought about the situation to begin with. 
(Yesterday I'd mentioned to Jane that I hope Seth, in his current book, 
will go into the real relationship between wellness and disease. That is, 
what purposes do diseases serve in our world, since they are so prevalent, 
and have always been with us? I feel that there must be reams of information there that may be quite new, or revolutionary. Certainly we aren't 
doing well as a species in coping with diseases. I also asked Jane about the 
question of diseases in wild animals — even those who have never seen a 
human being. If we create our diseases through our thoughts and lifestyles, 
how about animals? There must be similar reasons for the same results to 
occur, which would mean we are even more closely related to animals than 
we suspect. Or there are different reasons for animal diseases — reasons 
that yield the same results we have to cope with. Some of my questions grew 
out of my taking the cats for treatment of fleas and ticks, I told Jane, and I 
repeated the questions today. 
(I'm quite aware that many of my own questions in this vein spring 
from insights gained through Jane's condition —just 
as Seth referred to 
such goals on Jane's part. But, I told her, there may be other ways to get the 
• 182 • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
same information. Meaning that Jane has carried her own situation far 
enough, and then some.) 
APRIL 19,1984 
4:03 P.M. THURSDAY 
(Jane called last night. This morning I took the lawn mower out to the 
shop a couple of miles outside town on Wellsburg Road. When I returned 
home I visited our next-door neighbors, IheBumbalos, briefly. They were getting Joe up to go to the doctor's office for blood work. He is very weak, and 
couldn 't get up himself I believe his death is near. 
(Jane was okay, although as I got to 330, three nurses were trying to 
insert a neiv catheter. Jane had had spasms. The nurses had some difficulty, 
and we were late eating lunch. Afterward we played the tape of the psychic 
reading a friend had sent ush last September. The tape was a copy, and the 
quality terrible — so bad we couldn't understand it all. I marveled that a 
scientist would send out a product like that. 
(Some of the material from the tape is good, other parts not good — 
some right, some wrong, as migh t be expected. He said Jane could die, bu t 
obviously she didn't. He was correct in mentioning anemia, incorrect about 
liver and spleen problems, as far as we know. The problem with such readings is their generalizations. One can always cite energy blockages, and 
probably be correct, but this says little. Most of us have energy blockages of 
some sort. Also, one not only has to penetrate the reality of the person being 
read, but that of the medium doing the reading. The reading offered no specific insights into the causes behind Jane's troubles, although this would be 
difficult in such a short time span. 
(The psychic reading was correct, I think, in saying that Jane had the 
creative potential to create a spectacular success, and recover. We thought 
the tape con tained a number of negative suggestions, though how one deals 
with physical troubles without sounding negative at times may be a problem 
in itself. Specifics are vital, however, so once again we are on our own. I still 
think Jane carries ivithin her her own solutions. She said she ivas "more 
unfavorably disposed toivarcl the reading than favorably disposed toward 
it. "Amen. So am I. But it's a valuable learning experience. I told Jane part 
of that value lay in the fact that we wailed until now to play it, ivhen she 
has decided to try to uncover her own causes and effects. Obviously, we 
didn't want to use the tape before. 
SUGGESTION AND HEALTH 
• 183 • 
(At 3:40 Jane began reading yesterday's session, and did very well 
indeed — her best yet with speed, and with both eyes open, whereas she usually has to close one or the other. She wore her glasses. "Maybe your doing so 
well today is an outcome of the session for yesterday," I said. She thought it 
possible. She was also eager to have a session today, and began it early.) 
I bid you another fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
The following material is for dictation, but I am giving it here 
also so that Ruburt will take it specifically to heart. There are certain 
simple steps that can be followed, whenever you find yourself in 
a difficult situation, whether the condition is one of poor health, a 
stressful personal involvement with another, a financial dilemma, or 
whatever. 
These steps seem very obvious, and perhaps too easy — but they 
will bring an immediate sense of ease and a peace of mind while your 
inner reserves are being released and activated. I have mentioned 
these steps many times, because they are so vital in clearing the conscious mind, and bringing some sense of relief to the frightened ego. 
1. Immediately begin to live in the present as much as possible. 
Try to become as aware as you can of present sense-data — all of it. 
Often, while you are in pain, for example, you concentrate upon 
that sensation alone, ignoring the feelings of ease that may be felt by 
other portions of the body, and unaware of the conglomeration of 
sounds, sights, and impressions that are also in the immediate environment. This procedure will immediately lessen the pressure of the 
problem itself, whatever it is, and give you a sense of refreshment. 
2. Refuse to worry. This fits in automatically with Step 1, of course. 
Tell yourself you can worry all you want tomorrow, or on some other 
occasion — but resolve not to worry in the present moment. 
3. When your thoughts do touch upon your particular problem 
in that present moment, imagine the best possible solution to the 
dilemma. Do not wonder how or why or when the ideal solution will 
come, but see it in your mind's eye as accomplished. Or if you are 
not particularly good at visual imagery, then try to get the feeling of 
thanksgiving and joy that you would feel if the problem was solved to 
your complete satisfaction. 
These steps will allow you breathing time, and actually help minimize the pressure of your situation, whatever it is. Then, quieted, 
• 184TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
you will be able to consider other suitable steps that may more 
directly address your particular solution. 
We will take a break, and then resume. 
(4:21. "He will come back, I guess," Jane said. She had been interrupted twice during her delivery: once to have her temperature taken — 
98.7 — and once to be given vitamin C. I read the session to her. "I have 
the feeling this is like first aid," she said. Resume at 4:27.) 
This is not dictation. Give us a moment. 
(Long pause.) While you and Ruburt embark upon a resolved 
path of getting to the bottom of Ruburt's difficulties, it is highly 
important that Ruburt in particular increase his experience of pleasure, and his concentration upon it, so that pleasure can counter any 
other emotionally distressful feelings that may emerge along the way. 
Again, we do not want a concentration solely upon deeply-felt 
fears. While these must be uncovered, they should be balanced by a 
new determination to seek out pleasure (emphatically) — the pleasure will help couch the fears. 
We will not abandon book dictation, but the concentration for 
now will be largely devoted to bettering Ruburt's condition by releasing his own energies, health, and flexibility. 
I suggest you start with a kind of free association on Ruburt's 
part. With your resolve in mind, almost any subject matter you begin 
with will start to lead in the proper direction. Again, we want, say, the 
release of painful thoughts or emotions somehow balanced by 
the steps I gave today, so that they provide a kind of supporting 
framework. 
("You're talking about outside the sessions themselves.") 
I am indeed. 
I will interrupt whenever I can be of benefit — and I will also 
provide sometimes short but pithy session material (with humor) that 
can be used sometimes as subject matter for free association. You can 
begin of course by free associating with any appropriate subject — 
his mother, his father, your relationship, your individual or joint 
sexual feelings, his ideas about his psychic material, his writing, or 
whatever — and I will also provide guidelines. 
The endeavor itself will also activate his own dream mechanisms, 
and you will find that both of you bring new creative understandings 
to the task. 
SUGGESTION AND HEALTH 
• 185 • 
Ruburt's (session) reading today also shows the body's own 
resiliency. 
Again, I activate those coordinates so vital to healing, exuberance, and well-being. 
("It's me, "Jane said after a long pause. 
(4:43 P.M. I read the session to her. It certainly would be a mistake to 
let book material go, for any reason. It would provide variety and a sense of 
accomplishment aside from any other more personal material Seth may give. 
The free association approach Seth suggests will be something different for 
us to try. I'll let an approach to handling the material work itself out. 
(Jane called early — before 9:00 P.M., ashoas getting ready to type this 
session. An insight concerning my questions about the role of diseases came 
to me after supper, before I began typing this session, and I want to note it 
for possible future discussion. Regarding my visit with Joe Bumbalo this 
morning: He has cancer. I found myself thinking about the cancer being a 
new, explosive growth within a body that was aging. That growth was fated 
to bring about not only the death of its host, but the cancer itself. So what 
was it doing, behaving in such a fashion? Was Joe Bumbalo giving birth to 
a new life form that upon death would be released to continue its growth 
elsewhere, just as ive believe Joe will do after his death?) 
CHAPTER 6 
"STATES OF HEALTH AND DISEASE" 
APRIL 20,1984 
4:12 P.M. FRIDAY 
O
ane called me last night with Elisabeth's help. Elisabeth, our German 
friend, left a lemon cake for me and had brought Jane an Easter basket 
(As Seth suggested we do yesterday, we tried free association today. It 
worked well, and came about spontaneously when I dropped my notebook on 
the bed when Jane asked me to get her wa ter. I was tired and somewha t exasperated, and she picked this up from me immediately. It set off a chain of 
associations for her, and she pursued them while saying she was half embarrassed to men tion them. Here are the brief notes I wrote as she talked: 
(When I seemed exasperated when Jane asked me to do something for 
her, and dropped my notebook on the bed, she at once felt a strong fear that 
she'd exasperate me beyond bearing— that she couldn't afford to get me 
mad at her. This at once led her to feeling that as a child it had been vital 
that she avoid the disapproval of others — her mother, Marie, especially. 
And even in college, the same thing. Jane feared that if she got Marie mad, 
Marie would get sick and die. Marie used to tell Jane it was her fault the 
mother was sick, and that it was also her fault that Jane's grandmother 
died, and the housekeeper. "If you didn't watch yourself, "Jane said, "you 
could get hurt yourself or hurt other people." 
"STATES OF HEALTH AND DISEASE" 
• 187 • 
(Jane also felt that the sessions could be responsible for more deaths, or 
hurting people. She'd been terrified holding sessions, way back in the beginning, for the woman in Louisiana ivho had MS. At the same time she'd felt 
a responsibility toward helping her. Jane basically didn't want anything to 
do with sick people — was afraid she could hurt them in sessions. 
(Jane didn't think the sessions could hurt her, though she often felt she 
didn't get enough information through for herself. We talked about other 
similar situations and things, and she was near tears at times — so there 
definitely is emotion there. I don't actually think we said anything brand 
new, but it was good to review it all. I explained my position that she didn't 
need to make bargains with herself, as she used to tell me she did — that it 
was perfectly okay to be healthy and talented at the same time, using one's 
abilities as one chose. The world wasn't going to pass any sort of judgment 
if she didn't choose to deal with the sick. 
(Afterward, she said several times that she wanted to have a session. I'd 
thought she might pass it up. Her Seth voice was somewhat louder than 
usual.) 
I bid you another most fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
You have started the free association in a good and rousing fashion, so that Ruburt becomes consciously aware of some of his own 
attitudes that he has more or less become blind to. He has progressed far enough, however, tell him, so that he does not have to 
fear any regression. The framework we have set up will prevent that. 
Now: Dictation. 
Before we discuss the human situation more specifically in relationship to health and "dis-ease" — let us consider the so-called 
states of health and disease as they apply in planetary terms, and as 
they operate in all species. This will give us a far vaster framework in 
which to understand the ways in which each individual person fits 
into the entire picture. 
Give us a moment... We will begin the next chapter, to be called: 
"States of Health and Disease" — the entire sentence in quotations. 
I used quotation marks around the entire heading for this chapter 
to stress the point that the heading is written with your own ideas of 
health and disease in mind. Actually, however, regardless of appearances and misreadings of natural events, the very idea of disease as 
• 188TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
you usually think of it, is chauvinistic (louder) in health rather than in 
sexual terms. 
Basically speaking, there are only life forms. Through their cooperation your entire world sustains its reality, substance, life, and 
form. If there were no diseases as you think of them, there would be 
no life forms at all. Your reality demands a steady fluctuation of physical and nonphysical experience. Most of you, my readers, understand that if you did not sleep you would die. The conscious 
withdrawal of mental life during life makes normally conscious experience possible. In the same way there must, of course, be a rhythm 
of physical death, so that the experience of normal physical life is 
possible. It goes without saying that without death and disease — for 
the two go hand in hand — then normal corporeal existence would 
be impossible. 
(4:30.) For all of man's fear of disease, however, the species has 
never been destroyed by it, and life has continued to function with 
an overall stability, despite what certainly seems to be the constant 
harassment and threat of illness and disease. The same is true, generally speaking, of all species. Plants and insects fit into this larger 
picture, as do all fish and fowl. 
I have said elsewhere that no species is ever really eradicated — 
and in those terms no disease, or virus, or germ, ever vanishes completely from the face of the earth. In the first place, viruses change 
their form, appearing in your terms sometimes as harmless and sometimes as lethal. So-called states of health and disease are also changing constantly — and in those vaster terms disease in itself is a kind 
of health, for it makes life and health itself possible (all quite intently). 
Later we will discuss what this means to you, the individual 
person, but for now I want to stress the fact that while it may seem 
natural enough to consider disease as a threat, an adversary or an 
enemy, this is not the case. 
The subject matter of suffering is certainly vitally connected to 
the subject at hand, but basically speaking, disease and suffering are 
not necessarily connected. Suffering and death are not necessarily 
connected either. The sensations of suffering, and the pain, do exist. 
Some are indeed quite natural reactions, and others are learned 
reactions to certain events. Walking barefoot on a bed of fire would 
most likely cause most of you, my readers, to feel the most acute 
"STATES OF HEALTH AND DISEASE" 
• 189 • 
pain — while in some primitive societies, under certain conditions 
the same situation could result instead in feelings of ecstasy or joy. 
We want to discuss "disease" as it exists apart from suffering for 
now, then. Then we will discuss pain and suffering and their implications. I do want to mention, however, that pain and suffering are 
also obviously vital, living sensations — and therefore are a part of 
the body's repertoire of possible feelings and sensual experience. 
They are also a sign, therefore, of life's vitality, and are in themselves 
often responsible for a return to health when they act as learning 
communications. 
(Long pause.) Pain, therefore, by being unpleasant, stimulates 
the individual to rid himself or herself of it, and thereby often promotes a return to the state of health. 
End of dictation. 
(4:48.) Remind Ruburt — in the meantime — that he is indeed 
a beloved daughter of the universe, and that his parents are as much 
the sea and sky as his physical parents. Period. End of session. I also, 
however, look in rather often on your own situation, and send you 
my support. 
(4:50 P.M. *I'm glad I had it,"Jane said, "even though it's late, 'cause 
it '5 got information you wanted. I did all right. I was able to clear my mind 
enough to give it." She seemed to feel good, and I told her she'd done well. 
And the session had gone into the question I'd noted yesterday at the end of 
the session, about the roles of health and disease in our world. I was tired. 
(Jane called with Carta's help at about 9:40, as I was typing this session. She saicl Carta hacl told her that she was on duty the night of the day 
Jane was admitted to the hospital April 20, just a year ago. I hadn't remembered this, nor had Jane.) 
APRIL 22,1984 
3:35 P.M. SUNDAY 
(No session was held today, April 21, 1984, but we clid do some free 
associating, so I'll present a summary of that material here, and follow it 
with a session and more free association whenever they come through. 
(I hacl several questions resulting from Jane's material of yesterday. A 
remark that I'd made, to the effect that her illness has probably cost us at 
least half a dozen books over the years, elicited a response from her; she 
• 190 • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
brought it up today, in fact. Now, she said, she wasn't doing anything 
except a little bit each day. She'd picked up the idea of discipline from me, 
in a most unfortunate way, I thought, considering her most spontaneous 
nature. We talked about why her psyche had done so. She agreed that she is 
protected from life in the hospital. She also thought that she personally 
couldn 'I live up to the high quality of the Seth material — her own "men tal 
work," a good way of putting it. The symptoms, then, served to keep her at 
her desk over the years because she was afraid that if left alone she'd fly off 
somewhere and wouldn't do anything. 
(The symptoms — and noiv the hospital — protected her from criticism, eliminated book tours, the whole bit. Jane got scared with Sumari in 
the beginning, just as she had at the start of the sessions in 1963, but she 
was also very curious and turned on. She was also frightened at the tests in 
sessions, of being wrong, and of the seance. Thought she'd be called a hysterical woman, an exhibitionist, and so on. Being right didn't carry the 
weight that being wrong did. Very good. There were tears at various times 
with today's material. 
(I talked about the first session for Jane's symptoms — the private portion of Session 208, for November 15, 1965 — yet she said that for her the 
whole thing really started the day before we went to a party in June 1966 
regarding How to Develop Your ESP Power. Our friends wanted to celebrate the publication of her first "psychic" book, her first mention of Seth, 
but she read poetry at the party and wouldn't talk about the ESP book — 
too embarrassed. A strange, protective way to behave. 
(At 4:40, she was near tears when I asked why her psyche hadn 'I risen 
up to protect her when it became obvious that she was heading for deep trouble with the symptoms. She said her psyche Md rise up to protect her many 
times — otherwise she'd have died, of course. She mentioned various periods of improvement — her work on her unfinished and unpublished autobiography, From This Rich Bed; her published novel, The Education of 
Oversoul Seven, and so on. But each time a new book came out she got 
worse. Near tears, she said that she didn't have to get any worse when a new 
book comes out — what's left? She agreed with me that she now has the ultimate protection of the hospital. 
("I'd better get some good out of this," she said. "It's no fun dredging up 
those feelings, so boy they better pay off." 
(A session obviously ivas held the next day, however, on April 22, 1984. 
It took place on Easter Sunday, a chilly, gray day. Jane had read the free"STATES OF HEALTH AND DISEASE" 
• 191 • 
association material for yesterday; she got through it okay, but had to struggle a bit. After we'd talked about the material, she announced a session) 
Now — I bid you another most fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.99) 
The following material is for Ruburt, and can be used as material for free association. Give us a moment. 
(Long pause.) Ruburt felt that his writing, and writing abilities, 
justified his existence — that it, the ability to write should make up 
for all other deficiencies. His mother helped make him feel unlikeable, but his abilities seemed to be his saving grace — and therefore 
to be encouraged and protected at all costs. 
It will help, as you did once some time ago, if you compose a list 
of Ruburt's good qualities and excellent personal characteristics. 
Then use this brief session itself as a starting point for free association. I may or may not return this afternoon, but I do activate 
those coordinates that quicken understanding, exuberance, and 
well-being. 
("All right,99Jane said. 
(3:43 P.M. I read the session to her. 
(Afterward we tried some free association. Jane began talking of her 
attempts to get people to listen to her poetry, and her early fears that she was 
considered odd because of her talents. This led her into talk about my 
mother's opinion of her — though I tried to show that Stella's opinion had 
changed and that she really liked Jane in later years. Jane agreed. I said it9s 
easy to judge the past, whereas one should instead simply try to learn from 
it and understand it, and go on from there. We seemed to arrive at an 
impasse of understanding today. 
(Jane was afraid of others as a young girl, and even in college — that 
she wouldn't get their approval — whereas, I said, the others should have 
been afraid that they wouldn't get her approval, since her abilities transcended theirs. So tohy should she sink to the common denominator? Jane 
said she'd never thought of that. I said it's too bad the young don't have the 
insigh t to stress their capabilities regardless of the opinions of others — bu t 
such thinking comes with age, usually, I'm afraid. 
(Even those at the writer's conference in the summer of 1957, at Milford, Pennsylvania, told her she'd outgroiv her urge to write — that she 
should have a baby. And Jane felt that her body could betray her by getting 
pregnant. She even thought I felt that way. It's true that I had no urge for 
• 192 • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
parenthood, but I didn 't think of betrayal, or bargains. Jane was afraid getting pregnant ivould ruin my career because I'd have to work full time. I 
could have reacted better than that, I'm sure. 
(I think the important thing today was that as we talked we saw how 
with each category Jane described negative beliefs and reactions — an 
excellent point. It's a thought we've had before — but it seems that each 
thing we've accomplished has been in the face of or in spite of a barrage of 
negative thoughts, feelings, and beliefs. 
(Yet she finally admitted that she knew she'd succeeded with my 
mother — not with my father, though. As to her own mother, Marie, I said 
it was perfectly okay to admit that she didn't succeed there, or chose to luithdraw or admit failure. Jane thought her mother hated her as a child, and 
still did even now. The mother's hatred, Jane said, led to her need for protection — perfectly normal, I said. Jane said that when he was drunk her 
father told her that Marie washer enemy. Evidently she believed this. 
(I read parts of the session for April 18 toJane — wherein Seth had said 
she'd become extremely frightened. It's an excellent session. *But that's it," 
Jane said mournfully. "I'm afraid I've gotten in so deep I can't get out. "A 
good, up-to-the-minute fear, out in the open. I've had the same fear many 
times. uBut I've decided that enough is enough, "Jane said, after I'd speculated about why her psyche hadn 'I put the brakes on her symptoms before this. 
Emotions were expressed after all, today, and the session was a success.) 
APRIL 25,1984 
3:10 P.M. WEDNESDAY 
(No session was held. Here is a summary of the free-association material we discussed yesterday, April 24: 
(Jane ivas blue and uncomfortable this morning: "What a way to live," 
she said. She'd thought of death, but didn't want to do that to me. She's 
looking for a sign of something belter — some improvement that will lift her 
spirits. She felt better after I read her the session for March 19, and a great 
Sumari poem I used to close out the essays for Dreams with. 
(Jane has even thought of having Debbie Harris take dictation at night, 
for another children's book. Perhaps an autobiography also. The nurses 
and aides were raising hell this morning with their jokes and tricks. This 
usually helps cheer up Jane, though she gels nervous if they don't keep their 
minds on what they 're doing when they lift her, say. 
"STATES OF HEALTH AND DISEASE" 
• 193 • 
(We talked about differing opinions regarding Prentice-Hall. These are 
to be expected, but all seem trivial now, given our presen t situation. 
(Jane thinks her work, her poetry, is good. Before he did Seth Speaks, 
she was scared Seth couldn't write a book. I'd had no such worries. Jane 
had felt that I was disappointed by the publication of her novel, The 
Rebellers — and correctly so. Both of us hacl been upset at the poor-looking, cheap, double-novel presentation. 
(I kept trying to get at events — before and at the time the sessions 
began — and Jane's symptoms. "I can 'I even go home for an hour, without 
it costing two hundred dollars, "Jane said, and started to cry. uBut I'm not 
ready to reconcile myself to the spot I'm in." But she said she was often careful about what she said to me, so that she wasn't always dumping on me 
when I came to the hospital. But if not me, I saicl, who could she talk to? 
Besides, I knew her moods and feelings much better, evidently, than she realized. She surprised me when she said, "I realized that I used to really dislike 
women." There was more.) 
I bid you a most fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
We will resume dictation. 
Even in situations that involve a so-called host-and-parasite relationship, there is a cooperative process. Fleas, for example, actually 
help increase circulation, and constantly comb animal's hair. At 
minute levels they also consume some bodily wastes, and creatures 
even smaller than they are. They also keep the immune system active 
and flexible. 
Many diseases are actually health-promoting processes. Chicken 
pox, measles, and other like diseases in childhood in their own way 
"naturally inoculate" the body, so that it is able to handle other elements that are a part of the body and the body's environment. 
When civilized children are medically inoculated against such 
diseases, however, they usually do not show the same symptoms, and 
to an important extent the natural protective processes are impeded. 
Such children may not come down with the disease against which 
they are medically protected, then — but they may indeed therefore 
become "prey" to other diseases later in life that would not otherwise 
have occurred. 
I am speaking generally here, for remember that your individual 
beliefs, thoughts, and emotions cause your reality, so no person dies 
• 194TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
ahead of his or her time. The individual chooses the time of death. 
It is true, however, that many cancers and conditions such as AIDS 
result because the immunity system has been so tampered with that the 
body has not been allowed to follow through with its own balancing 
procedures. 
Again, however, no individual dies of cancer or AIDS, or any 
other condition, until they themselves have set the time. 
There are many other conditions to be taken into consideration, 
for such diseases certainly do have strong social connections. They 
occur in social species. This does not mean that they are necessarily 
contagious at all, but that they do bear an overall relationship to 
the give-and-take between individuals and their social and natLiral 
frameworks. 
(3:27.) A city might be overrun by rats, for example — a fine situation for the rats if not the populace — but the entire picture 
would include unrest in the populace at large, a severe dissatisfaction with social conditions, feelings of dejection, and all of those 
conditions together would contribute to the problem. Rat poison 
may indeed add its own dangers, killing other small birds or rodents, 
and contaminating animal food supplies. Nor are insects invulnerable to such conditions, in such an hypothesized picture (long pause). 
Actually, all forms of life in that certain environment would be seeking for a balanced return to a more advantageous condition. 
You may wonder why so many forms of life would be involved in 
what might seem to be self-destructive behavior, often leading to 
death — but remember that no consciousness considers death an 
end or a disaster, but views it instead as a means to the continuation 
of corporeal and noncorporeal existence. 
I may or may not return this afternoon, but in any case I have 
activated those coordinates that so encourage self-healing, faith, and 
well-being. 
("Thank you." 
(3:35 P.M. Jane had been interrupted once for nursing care. "I don't 
know when, bu t sometime earlier — quite a bit earlier — I felt that that 
would be the subject today," she said. "It's more on your own questions, 
too." Then she added, "I know he's going into at least two other things in 
this chapter, too: that at certain times people mostly died in their 3O's, say, 
at one period, and usually lived to be very old in another. Also, that ive've 
"STATES OF HEALTH AND DISEASE" 
• 195 • 
gotten out of touch with our own feelings about death, and are afraid of it. 
And he isn't going to tell people not to get vaccinated otherwise they'd end 
up totally confused." 
(I thought the session very interesting. Seth's comments about fleas 
made me wonder about using the flea bombs in the house that Frank Longwell had gotten for me a few days ago. These would kill every flea in the 
house, supposedly. And the vet had given me flea powder to use on the cats 
themselves. Would this actually deprive them of a valuable symbiotic relationship? I began wondering how to compromise about the flea situation 
this summer, now that the rugs in the house are all clean. 
(I told Jane that Seth's material on childhood inoculations leading to 
later diseases might be vulnerable to statistics. Enough records certainly 
exist, that such connections might be found — if they were looked for diligently enough on a long-term basis. Such a discovery could lead to revisions 
in medical treatment, though Fm not sure what or how. I told Jane that the 
material made me speculate about Joe Bumbalo: He's had many operations 
in his life, and has been shot full of drugs often. Could such repeated dosages 
have any thing to do with his having cancer now ? And even now Joe is 
taking powerful chemotherapy treatments. He's losing his hair, I believe. 
(Today Jane said she'd talked it over with Debbie Harris, and that the 
latter ivould be coming in three nights a iveek while Jane tries some spontaneous dictation. Fifty cents a page for finished copy, they agreed upon. Jane 
didn't know about trying an emotional subject like an autobiography with 
someone else, though. I said let it work itself out. 
(Jane and I were both impressed that we received checks totaling more 
than $900from Maude Cardwell yesterday. I deposited them in the special 
account on my way to the hospital this noon. 
(I got no work done on Dreams this morning. It's been over a week 
since Fve worked on the book.) 
APRIL 27,1984 
4:20 P.M. FRIDAY 
(The day was brilliant and very warm — almost 80 degrees when I left 
the house for 330. Jane's room was pleasantly cool, though. Later I turned 
on the fan. She showed me how the large scab on her right knee, over the site 
of the broken bone that had become infected, had peeled off partially in hydro 
this morning. It's now half its former size. Underneath the missing portion 
• 196 • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
I saw the fresh pink flesh of new growth. There is still a large hole in the leg 
at the drainage site. Both of us felt good abou t the improvements, though. 
(On the way to 330 this noon I stopped to give the hospital the check for 
$18,000-plus that Td received the day before yesterday from Blue Cross. A 
couple of weeks previously a check for some $3700 had arrived; the two go 
together to make one payment as billed by the hospital to the insurance company. Tm afraid that when I opened the letter and saw the check for the 
$18,000,1fell no reaction at all. 1 wondered then at my lack offeeling. I put 
my neutral state down to the long wait involved, my decision not to worry if 
at all possible, and probably other factors I haven7 even bothered to examine. 
Anger must be involved. Nor did I feel any thing when the check for the 
$3700 came. I confess the lack offeeling here has caused me periodic concern. 
(It appears that the payments will be for 100% of the bill, rather than 
80% — but here again Tm waiting to see, suspended in a kind of cocoon 
of inaction or non-reaction . ... 
(The windows ivere wide open and a refreshing breeze filled 330 as Jane 
went into trance. The fan was on also.) 
I bid you another most fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
The obvious improvement in Ruburt's knee is a fine example of 
the body's self-healing processes. 
It could not be accomplished by the conscious mind — though 
the conscious mind can indeed will the process to occur. (A most 
important point to remember.) The knee will continue to improve, and 
the finger also (on the left hand). 
Now give us a moment... dictation. 
I am not advising my readers to refuse to have their children vaccinated, since you now have to take vaccination into consideration 
because of the prominence of it in society. It is very possible, however, that science itself will in time discover the unfortunate side 
effects of many such procedures, and begin to reevaluate the entire 
subject. 
It is true that some native populations — particularly in the 
past — were free of many of the childhood diseases that are considered natural by western medicine. It is also true, of course, that some 
primitive societies have lost large numbers of their populations to 
disease. Some of those instances, however, were caused precisely by 
the sudden introduction of western medicine. 
"STATES OF HEALTH AND DISEASE" 
• 197 • 
I am not condemning western medicine per se, however, but 
merely pointing out its many detrimental aspects. Medicinal science 
is also in a state of transition, and it is just as important — if not 
more so — that it examine its concepts as well as its techniques. 
The idea of using animals for experimentation has far more 
drawbacks than advantages; there is the matter of one kind of consciousness definitely taking advantage of another kind, and thus 
going counter to nature's cooperative predisposition. 
In the distant past some ancient civilizations did indeed use animals in such a fashion, but in a far different framework. The doctors 
or priests humbly stated their problems verbally and through ritualistic dancing, and then requested the help of the animal — so that 
the animals were not sacrificed, in those terms, nor taken advantage 
of. Instead, they united in a cooperative venture, in which animals 
and man both understood that no consciousness truly died but only 
changed its form. 
Animals have indeed often been quite helpful to man in various 
healing situations and encounters, but in all such cases these were 
cooperative ventures. 
(4:36.) This leads me of course to at least mention here the cruel 
methods used in the slaughtering of animals and fowls for human 
consumption. The creatures are treated as if they possessed no feeling or consciousness of their own — and such attitudes show a most 
unfortunate misreading of natural events. As a direct result, at least 
as many diseases develop through such procedures as would exist in 
a highly primitive society with unsanitary conditions. Period. 
In that kind of setting, however, balances would right themselves 
because the basic understanding between living creatures would be 
maintained. You cannot divorce philosophy from action, and the 
cruelty in slaughterhouses would not be perpetrated if it were not for 
distorted philosophies dealing with the survival of the fittest on the 
one hand, and the egotistical assumption that God gave man animals to do with as man wished. 
End of dictation. (4:43.) Take to heart what I said about Ruburt's 
knee, so that he realizes in fact that the healing processes are indeed 
operating within him all the time. That realization will help change 
conditions enough so that the two of you can be home together sooner 
than you may think possible. Again, I activate those coordinates that 
1 HE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
quicken high spirits, strength, and vitality — and I bid you a fond 
good afternoon. 
(4:45 P.M. "Good afternoon, Seth.") 
APRIL 30,1984 
4:11 P.M. MONDAY 
(Here's a summary of the free association material we discussed on 
Sunday afternoon, April 29: 
(Jane had had thoughts of death when she came into the hospital a year 
ago. She was on morphine and hacl hallucinations, too. Frank Longivell's 
father had just died, and she feared she might lake the same road. She really 
clid dislike women when she was younger. She'd been afraid of her body, and 
sex. Took it as a compliment when told she hacl a mind like a man. Also 
thought women disliked her — feared that she ivas after their men, and all 
kinds of things. 
(We talked about her home environment, and how in 1965 the young 
psychologist at Dr. Inslream's hypnosis symposium hacl rearousecl her fears, 
and my own upsets. Jane recalled being called a fraud by a fellow student 
in college, and by my mother. We talked about religion. All of this engendered some emotional reactions, but no tears. I kept trying to go back to 
what had happened before Jane got her symptoms, before she became wellknown, and so forth. I told her I remembered Seth saying once that her symptoms "were amazingly stubborn." Many things spoke of a great fear of 
spontaneity, reinforced again and again after the sessions hacl started, and 
the symptoms. 
(Jane began to cry when she recounted the time at home a few years ago 
when she couldn't get up and on her feet — finally reaching that point of 
helplessness. I got mad at her and yelled, saying Fd leave her sitting there if 
she didn't get up — thus displaying my own deep fears that we had reached 
a sad and desperate point in the course of the symptoms. She remembered my 
crying at times. I told her Fd cried at times when she hadn't known it. 
(We tried more free association on the afternoon of April 30: 
("Years ago in the 1960's, "Jane said, "7 thought I loved you a lot more 
than you loved me, and that you could get along very well all by yourself." 
I said that was a total misconception on her part, that Fcl never hacl such 
ideas, nor wanted to do any such thing. It hacl never entered my head. I 
knew things bugged me — working, being an artist, or trying to, and so 
"STATES OF HEALTH AND DISEASE" 
• 199 • 
forth — but not anything to do with her. I didn't even fear fatherhood as 
much as she feared becoming pregnant. Not that I wanted fatherhood. 
(We talked a lot about our early days together — work and our arts, 
prestige, money, and the opinions of others. I said that much of lohat we 
talked about would be considered the normal hassles in life, but that we had 
put negative connotations on those things and ignored the positive. Our 
told troubles now seem minute in retrospect. I added that each person is so 
different from each other person that it's useless to make judgments, so each 
person might as ivell do their thing and let the chips fall. Who's to say it's 
right or wrong, as long as one doesn't injure another, or steal, and so on. 
(Jane said she though t that if I'd had to choose between pain ting and 
her, I'd have chosen painting. Not so, I said — after all, I worked at commercial art four years full time at one stretch, and part time a number of 
other times. She agreed that she needed much approval — something I 
hadn't fully understood at the time we married. I added that I'd always been 
proud of her as my wife, and considered myself very lucky to have her. I'd 
never once questioned her loyalty or love, and I'd taken it that she felt the 
same way. I discovered today that I could have been wrong at times — strange. 
(She'd even thought I disapproved of her way of dress at times, whereas, 
if memory serves me correctly, I'd almost always liked the way she dressed, fixed 
her hair, and so on. I made no such judgments. She said she'd brooded a lot. 
(At 4:03 she said she was getting upset by our talk. I asked her to have 
a session on Seth's remark about her symptoms being "amazingly stubborn." 
She decided to have a cigarette and see if she could go into trance. I'd always 
thought the sessions themselves were a form of self-hypnosis. We'd talked 
about self-hypnosis as a way of breaking through today. 
(When Jane spoke for Seth her voice was rather quiet, since it was still 
sort of raspy from yesterday's laryngitis, or whatever she'd had. She thought 
the loss of voice volume was due to free-association material. A strong 
wind — very strong at times — had sprung up this afternoon, and at 
times I had trouble hearing Jane above its noise. Her eyes were often closed, 
and she took many long pauses. The day was alternately bright and sunny, 
and very gloomy and cloudy.) 
I bid you another fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
This is not dictation. 
Above all, Ruburt must not concentrate upon what is wrong. In 
the deepest of terms, if you understand my meaning, nothing is wrong. 
• 213 • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
You have instead a conglomeration of severely conflicting beliefs, so 
that there is no clear single road to action. 
(I understand Seth s declaration that in the deepest of terms there is 
nothing wrong. It s a perception I've used often in the past year as Fve tried 
to understand what's going on.) 
You want to clear the road. The free association is valuable because 
it helps to point out those conflicting feelings and beliefs, brings them 
into consciousness, and into the present moment, where they can 
indeed be understood in the light of knowledge that has been acquired 
since — but not been allowed to act upon the old conflicting beliefs. 
The expression of emotions in itself is an expression of action, of 
motion. To move requires first of all the expression of feeling, and the 
expression of any feeling makes room for still further motion. Selfhypnosis can indeed be invaluable in terms of accelerating bodily 
motion and healing. Expression, rather than repression, is vital. 
Often Ruburt has not been in touch with his own feelings, but 
would try to intellectualize many away. He needs to realize that it is 
safe to express himself — and that expression will not bring aboiit 
abandonment. 
(4:24. Jane had also said today that she'd felt that she had to be careful how she approached me so I wouldn 'I get mad and leave her. Those feelings gradually dissipated over the years, yet they must have had a part to 
play in the onset of symptoms.) 
People who wrote books against the Catholic Church were 
excommunicated. Ruburt transferred those fears to society at large. 
There was a conflict between creative work and the church even 
when only poetry was involved. He should indeed give himself suggestions that the necessary insights will come to him, and that the 
proper connections be made whether consciously or unconsciously. 
But the idea is that it is safe to express himself, and that the true purpose of his life is indeed to express those characteristics that compose his personal reality. 
(Very long pause.) He should also realize that pleasure is indeed a 
virtue. By all means express your emotions to each other as they naturally occur. Ruburt was not taught to love himself as a child, and 
thought of his talents as a way of justifying his existence — an existence of somewhat suspicious nature, he felt, since his mother told 
him often that he was responsible for her own poor health. 
"STATES OF HEALTH AND DISEASE" 
• 201 • 
These issues do all fit together, but they can be unscrambled, 
brought into the present, and reconciled. The body is more than 
agreeable, and more than able, to bring abovit an extraordinary 
recovery. 
(Hear that, Jane ?) 
I do indeed activate for you both those coordinates that quicken 
insight, wisdom, peace of mind, and the healing processes. Again 
remind Ruburt of the steady improvement in his knee, and of his 
body's capabilities. 
A fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon. Thank you." 
(4:33. "I did pretty good," Jane said as I lit a smoke for her. "I didn 9t 
know whether I could do it or not. I almost came out of it a couple of times, 
but I did it." Td noticed the instances she meant. I read the session to her. 
She had a couple of thoughts as she listened to me. One: She transferred 
stuff about excommunication into the loss of companionship — that 
nobody would want anything to do with you if you crossed them up. Two: 
She'd tried to be more like me — cooler, not expressing so many emotions, 
more in control And that had been a mistake on her part, a serious one, 
born, I said, out of her desire for protection and love. 
("Well, you can see how they fit together, "I said. As we talked she began 
to feel Seth around again. She was reluctant to do more because it was getting late. I told her to forget that.) 
(4:45.) In other words, Ruburt was given strong creative abilities 
that he was determined to express — but at the same time early in 
his life he was given the idea that it was highly dangerous to express 
the very viniqueness that was inherent in his creativity. This is a part 
of the main issue. 
He is to realize that if he has any duty or purpose in life, it is 
indeed to express those very abilities (all very emphatically), since 
those abilities are so natural in his makeup, they also possess their 
own protective mechanisms. He must realize that he is free to 
express his poetic, psychic nature, and to follow wherever it leads — 
since it is indeed his natural pathway into existence, and his most 
intimate connection with the universe, and with All That Is. 
This session does tie issues together quite well — and can be 
used to advantage for free association also. 
End of session. 
• 2 0 2 TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
("Thank you." 
(4:50 P.M. Jane had been interrupted once during her second delivery. 
"That was very good," I told her. "It contains excellent suggestions in 
itself." Fve already planned to read it to her every day for a while. It can 
serve well as a basis for self-hypnosis, but I also plan to help my wife here, 
and we can see what we can accomplish in the afternoons. 
(I hardly had time to discuss it with her, but I think the session is a 
breakthrough one that's most valuable. It also showed me that even Jane's 
poetry was suspect, where I'd been under the impression that the poetry was 
the one aspect of her creative abilities that was essentially free, or uncontaminated by fears or doubts. For years 1'd thought that if Jane had done only 
poetry, she'd have had minimal troubles, if any.) 
MAY 2,1984 
4:29 P.M. WEDNESDAY 
("The mountains have fallen fathoms into the sea, and still I am I," 
wrote Jane in a poem when she'd been quite young. 
("I became a priest of God to learn what sin is," she also wrote. The 
priests she saw while she was living with her mother hadn't liked those 
works, and castigated her for writing them. Jane rebelled. She refused to get 
a dispensation from the church so she could read certain works. She told me 
again about the book-burning a priest had conducted in her back yard, 
when she was a teen-ager. This is some of the free-association material toe 
discussed on May 1. 
(Jane has kept the session for April 30 in mind, but hasn't tried any 
self-hypnosis yet. One of us has to see that she either reads or hears it each 
day. 1'd had the idea of starting right in trying to hypnotize her, but thought 
better of it. I decided it was better to let her think over the session for a while, 
then lead into the hypnosis thing. I think the session in itself is a form of 
hypnosis, and an excellent one.) 
(When I got to 330 today I found that the call light in Jane's room 
hadn't been working properly this morning, and now saw that it hung out 
of its fixture, half dismantled. People were coming and going in the room 
often — at one time there had been four nurses and aides there, laughing 
and joking. I tried to read the session for April 30 to Jane after lunch, and 
it seemed we were interrupted every few lines. In addition, a nurse had 
unintentionally gotten Jane's medications mixed up this morning. 
"STATES OF HEALTH AND DISEASE" 
• 203 • 
(fane finally became quite angry and vexed, and burst out talking 
about the lack of privacy in 330 today. This was all part of our free-association material today, May 2. She vehemently expressed her feelings, with 
tears, that if she wanted privacy, being in the hospital wasn't the way to get 
it. She'd always wanted privacy, she added. "It's pretty dumb, because I sure 
as hell don't get any privacy this way," she exclaimed — and I thought she 
was clearing a road, as Seth had suggested last session. 
(Jane reiterated that she hadn't trusted her female body, and that she 
thinks she's now paying for not having kids — after all, she'd been told 
that's what women were supposed to do. She also thought the church's teachings about motherhood were ambiguous. A sonnet by Shakespeare that she'd 
read in high school had also given her the idea that her role in life was to 
bear children, and forget everything else. She hadn't liked the sonnet and 
hoped it would shrivel away. She thought the church meant that a woman 
should be either a nun or a mother. 
(A repairman finally came to fix the call light, which mean t Jane had 
to be covered while he was in the room. This too bothered her. She'd started 
out trying to read the session, but did poorly, so I finished reading it to her 
by 4:25. We'd had many interruptions by then. "Well," she said, "I got 
pretty damned upset this afternoon, and I'm not comfortable, but maybe if 
I have a smoke and calm down I can have a brief session. I feel Seth around 
and he's got a couple of comments, so I should get them." 
(Indeed, she'd been quite uncomfortable, lying on her back, most of the 
afternoon. The same yesterday. I thought her expressions of anger very beneficial, though. Her Seth voice still wasn't as clear as it usually is, nor was 
her "regular" voice, but both voices today were much improved over their condition yesterday. Her delivery today was faster, but her voice still wasn't very 
strong. The day outside was quite bright by now, so we had the heavy blue 
curtains pulled. And we got through the session without any interruptions.) 
I bid you a fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
The expression of emotion is excellent, particularly the release 
of anger and frustration. 
This does not mean those emotions should be concentrated 
upon, but acknowledged and expressed. This allows new feelings to 
take their place — and again, accelerates motion at all levels. 
Some of the material may be difficult initially for Ruburt to 
express, but it is well worth the effort and the momentary outbursts. 
• 2 0 4 TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
Such experiences should be followed, however, by reassurances, 
both on your part, and by self-reminders on Ruburt's part that his 
being and experience are indeed couched and held securely in 
safety and love. 
The free association is indeed then operating as it should, and 
that expression will clear the mental and emotional roads, so that 
Ruburt's natural, innate high spirits can begin to show their faces 
again. You are both handling the situation well, then. 
I do activate those coordinates that quicken your individual and 
joint understanding, and the natural healing processes that do 
indeed promote a resurgence of natural exuberance and pleasure. 
("Okay,"Jane said, "it's me." 
("Thank y on." 
(4:35 P.M. "I'm telling you, I didn't know whether I could have it or 
not, "Jane said. Her voice had become somewhat ragged and muted. I read 
the session to her. She'd really gotten upset shortly before the session. I reassured her, saying to let the session penetrate. Then, I said, "You can write 
your own book about all of this, like God of Jane." 
("7/7 ever felt high spirits I wouldn't know what to do." 
("You could enjoy them, though — after you'd questioned them, "Ijoked. 
MAY 6,1984 
4:23 RM. SUNDAY 
(Jane called last night. Her mattress felt better, she said. She's had a lot 
of difficulty with it for the past few days, and has been blue and quite 
uncomfortable while trying to lay on her back. 
(I did no work on Dreams yesterday while picking up the lawn mower, 
and only an hour and a half this morning because of writing letters. A 
couple of clays ago 49 letters arrived from Pren tice-Hall. 
(This morning Dr. Wilson visited Jane, and suggested that he'd like to 
clean out the site above her right knee where it's open and draining. There 
is a large hole there, although signs of healing are apparent. He also said 
that even if Jane had an operation, he didn't know if it would help 
straighten the leg. Jane and he discussed some sort of chair in which she 
coulcl sit up, and he men tioned a type of vehicle like a wheel-chair-lounge of 
some sort, that perhaps coulcl be adjusted far her to use. 
"STATES OF HEALTH AND DISEASE" 
• 205 • 
("That terrible bout of the blues that I had for the last two or three days 
is gone," she said. "It just went aivay." I should have realized those feelings 
were contributing to her overall discomfort, for watching her Tel been positive that much of her trouble was caused by her own reactions. Yet she'd also 
been very uncomfortable today while lying on her bach Indeed, when I tried 
to position her for supper, she fell off to one side of the bed at such a severe 
angle that I had to call for help to get her straightened up again. 
(My own exasperation had shown through clearly at times, for it seemed 
that no matter what I did myself, or what anyone else did, my wife ivas just 
not going to be comfortable — not then, anyhow. Her right leg, doubled up 
as it is, keeps pushing her toward her left, tipping her awkwardly. 
(After she'cl eaten and I was getting ready to leave, Jane said, "I really 
feel guilty at making your life so hard," and added more words to that effect. 
I think this is the first time — at least that I remember — that she's made 
this statement in such a simple, direct way. At once I thought it was excellent material for free association, and that we should pursue it I replied 
that we'd better forget that and try to focus on the future — yet such guilt 
feelings coulcl be playing a significant role in her daily life, and we should 
find out if this is so. 
(My own pendulum sessions lately have told me that I was feeling my 
own guilt because I thought I should have helped her more in the past Just 
this morning my pendulum* for the first time said that I no longer felt 
guilty. This is an accomplishment for me, and one I must continue to 
explore. I've taken to using the pendulum in the morning after breakfast 
and last thing at night before going to bed. It appears to be working well. I 
haven't gone into this material with Jane yet. Now may be the time. 
(The windows were wide open in 330 when she had the session, and at 
times the traffic noise was quite bothersome. The room had turned a little 
chilly, and Jane had asked me to turn off the fan.) 
I bid you a most fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
*In 1974 I wrote in Jane/Seth's The Nature of Personal Reality: "The pendulum 
is a very old method. I use it, with excellent results, to obtain ideomotor — Subconscious' — responses about knowledge that lies just outside my usual consciousness. I hold a small heavy object suspended by a thread so that it's free to move. By 
mentally asking questions, I obtain 'yes' or 'no' answers according to whether the 
pendulum swings back and forth, or from side to side." 
• 2 0 6 TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
Dictation. Remember that each segment of life is motivated by 
value fulfillment, and is therefore always attempting to use and 
develop all of its abilities and potentials, and to express itself in as 
many probable ways as possible, in a process that is cooperatively — 
correction: in a process that takes into consideration the needs and 
desires of each other segment of life. 
The very existence of certain kinds of viruses provides safety 
against many other diseases, whether or not those viruses even exist 
in an active manner. It is obvious, of course, that the overall physical 
stability of the earth is possible because of the ever-occurring storms, 
"natural disasters," and other seeming calamities. Yet such events 
promote the earth's great, bountiful food supplies, and serve to 
redistribute the planet's resources. Period. 
In the same fashion, diseases also, in the overall picture, promote the health and well-being of life in all of its aspects. Value fulfillment operates within microbes and nations, within individual 
creatures and entire species, and it unites all of life's manifestations 
so that indeed creatures and their environments are united in an 
overall cooperative venture — a venture in which each segment 
almost seeks to go beyond itself in creativity, growth, and expression. 
In a smaller, individual framework, each man and woman, then, is 
motivated by this same value fulfillment. Period. 
You will shortly see how some diseases are caused by the detriments set up against value fulfillment, often because of fears, doubts, 
or misunderstandings — and how other diseases may actually lead 
to instances of value fulfillment that are misread or misinterpreted. 
I also want to stress here that cdl aspects of life experience not 
only sensations but emotional feelings. Therefore, there is a kind 
of innate gallantry that operates among all segments of life — a 
gallantry that deserves your respect and consideration. You should 
have respect, then, for the cells of your body, the thoughts of your 
mind (pause), and try to understand that even the smallest of creatures shares with you the emotional experience of life's triumphs 
and vulnerabilities. 
I bid you, then, another fond good afternoon. 
End of dictation — and once again, I activate those coordinates 
that so quicken your vast energies, powers, and abilities. 
("All right" 4:45 P.M.) 
"STATES OF HEALTH AND DISEASE" 
• 207 • 
MAY 9,1984 
4:29 P.M. WEDNESDAY 
(Here is a summary of our free-association material for Monday afternoon, May 7, 1984: 
(I described to Jane my recent use of the pendulum to study my guilt feelings about her having her symptoms and losing her teeth. We went into considerable detail here. At the lime we talked my gums were bothering me 
considerably in the lower front, and I've been having more than enough 
tooth trouble. I explained in some detail my feelings of guilt because Jane 
has her troubles. There was some emotion involved. Jane thinks I can regenerate my teeth and gums. 
(We then discussed her reaction to her early religious home environment, especially to the priests in her life. She agreed that her own behavior 
was compulsive, in her fastening upon religion, say, and later on me. Some 
of this may have been due to her lack of a normal home environmen t, without a father, we said, yet Ifelt there were strong independent elements in her 
personality that encouraged such behavior anyhow. Of course all extremes 
aren't acceptable, as say, a life of crime. Jane lacked a countering influence 
to the priests. She also felt "betrayed" by Father Darren when he made 
advances to her when she was in her earlier teens. The book burning didn't 
help, either. The religious ideas really took hold, and I think we still only 
partially understand why. 
(This is important to note: after we'd had our talk, I suddenly realized 
that my gums had stopped bothering me. I told Jane I'd forgotten about the 
situation. The lesson is obvious, as I wrote when I got home: Sharing the 
challenge with those others who are involved helps a great deal, and may be 
vital. The others can, it seems, help minimize the nega tive aspects of a situation while enhancing the positive. Have I helped Jane in this manner, or 
hindered her by reinforcing joint negative beliefs? But the event helped me 
get first-hand experience with the therapeutic benefits that can stem from 
simple communication. It reminded me of the therapist's classic couch. I 
want to discuss this more with Jane.) 
u 
(This is a summary of ourfree-association material for Tuesday, May 8, 
1984 — Jane's 55th birthday: 
(Jane tried using the pendulum I carry in my luallet; this followed from 
our discussions about my using the pendulum of late. Since I've been 
• 208 • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
achieving considerable relief with my gum challenges the last few days, Jane 
has become increasingly interested. She's also somewhat intimidated, saying 
that I get better results than she does — whereas I think her own altitude 
gets in her way and that comparisons shouldn 't be made. We also had trouble with it today because, it being her birthday, several extra interruptions 
took place as various staff members came in to sing to us, and so forth. They 
brought cards and foil toys. I gave Jane a card and candy, and brought in 
forsy thia, which moved her to tears. The yellow-flowered shrubs grow in the 
front yard of the hill house. 
(Because of the interruptions by staff Jane didn't stay long with the 
pendulum. She said she also felt that she should cover up her use of the pendulum, that "people will really think I'm nuts." I saicl that the truth of the 
matter is that no one paid the slightest attention to the pendulum lying on 
her belly, nor even understood what she was doing. I added that she hacl to 
be true to herself, that her troubles came from her not being so, and that if 
she wanted to use the pendulum then she should do so. 
(fane did get a few answers, and was able to hold the pendulum better 
in her left hand than she'd thought she coulcl. First she received no answer 
when she asked if she had a clear road to using her abilities. Then came the 
answer, "No." The pendulum saicl it coulcl help her open a clear road to 
motion. She did get the feeling of weight or motion while using the pendulum, which she said was a good sign. Mostly she decided to talk, though. 
(Thoughts of her birthday at once led her to Mother's Day ancl her own 
mother, Marie. Jane talked at length about the welter of conflicting events 
surrounding Marie ancl herself. She realized that as a youngster she had 
loved her mother, and tried hard to do things for her, even when Marie had 
rejected her efforts say, in buying a nightgown of the "wrong" color. 
(Then we talked abou t her grandparen ts in connection with Jane and 
Marie; her grandmother's death; the lawsuit against the town, which I don't 
think I'd heard about before; welfare;Jane's grandfather, Joseph Burdo, and 
her feelings for him, and so forth. She tolcl me how a traffic light was 
installed at the corner of Lake Street and Nelson Avenue, as a result of the 
suit Marie won against the city, concerning her grandmother's death. Jane 
recalled no details about the suit, the time it took, the money involved. She'd 
been perhaps five or six years old. I said tha t once again Jane hacl been presented with extremes of behavior in the family. There hadn't been any middle 
ground, it seemed. She talked about her grandfather's death at the age of 68, 
"STATES OF HEALTH AND DISEASE" 
• 209 • 
when she was 20years old. I was surprised to hear her say that she'd never 
read any of her poetry to him.) 
u 
(May 9: Jane read the free-association material for the tiuo previous 
days, and did quite well indeed. She read portions of it very rapidly. As we 
discussed it a little she reminded me that she still experienced feelings of isolation at times. I said they might be normal enough, that everyone was 
essentially isolated, or at least alone, since no one else could live their life for 
them. They couldn't be born for them or die for them. At the same time I 
knew what she meant — that she needed pretty steady or even constant reinforcement in the world. 
(On the TV program, In Search Of, we watched a presentation of 
Cleve Backster and his work with plants reacting — or not, as the case was 
sometimes — to human emotions. Very interesting, we thought. 
(After her lunch and reading of the free-association material, Jane saicl 
she didn 7 really know what to do with herself. I started work on fan mail, 
which has begun to pile up again. A t 3:45, Jane said she sensed or felt a 
"largeryou" — meaning me — about her. It was a hard thing to describe, 
she said, and echoed my question about it being my own entity, or a portion 
thereof. She felt a great love from the entity. If it could be described at all, she 
said, it could be "circular," though really it had no form in that sense. 
(The aftereffects from the "form" lingered as toe talked about it and I 
made these notes. Jane hadn't been consciously thinking about psychic matters. Earlier I'd read her the verse from the birthday card I'd bought her yesterday, and she had enjoyed that as much as she had yesterday, when I'd 
read it to her for the first time. Both of us had felt emotion at the reading, 
both times. She didn't know if that might have triggered her experience. But 
our feelings engendered by the reading of the card ivere valuable even ts in 
themselves. 
(It was getting late when Jane said she felt Seth around after all. We 
had one interruption right after she started: A young girl delivered a bowl 
of flowers from Steve and Tracy Blumenthal. Jane lay quietly in trance 
while I look the gift from the girl and set it on the stand beside my chair.) 
I bid you another foncl good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
This is not book dictation. 
• 2 1 0 TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
(Pause.) Ruburt's experience this afternoon was a response to 
your own notes concerning communication and its importance. 
(See my note at the conclusion of the free-association material for May 7, 
at the beginning of this session.) 
In this case, the notes allowed Ruburt to see the vaster and yet 
even more intimate kind of communication that unites you, and that 
unites all of life. 
The television program, about the communication of plants, also 
served as an impetus, so that Ruburt was able to sense the continuous 
"inner world" flow of love and cooperation within which all of life is 
couched. Ruburt had spoken about feeling isolated at times, and the 
experience was meant also to show him that isolation itself is an illusion. 
(Longpause.) Such communications exist at all levels, but for his 
own personal reasons, and because of your relationship, Ruburt in 
particular tuned into your own greater personality with those attributes of love, deep understanding, and respect that often seem so difficult, it seems, to express adequately. 
Once again I accelerate those coordinates that activate healing, 
exuberance, and well-being — and therefore touch the source from 
which, indeed, the spirit of life itself springs. 
("Thank you." 
(4:35 P.M. "It wasn't terribly vivid, "Jane said about her experience, 
after I'd read the session to her, "but it was noticeable enough to be 
noticed — you know what I meanV I said that in the session she'd effectively answered her own questions about the experience. I suggested that perhaps she could have it again when she was alone — at night, say.) 
MAY 12,1984 
3:37 RM. SATURDAY 
(Jane was again very uncomfortable today when she lay on her back. 
This pattern has persisted for a number of days now. "How can you be more 
uncomfortable now, when the bedsores are healing, than you used to be?"I 
asked some lime ago. She didn't know. My own eventual conclusion was 
that more was involved — that it had to do with her attitudes and beliefs. 
(At least when I've been there in 330, Jane's appetite has gone downhill, 
and she's slacked off on free-association material and the sessions. I thought 
of requesting of staff that she be given some Darvoset, or something like it, 
"STATES OF HEALTH AND DISEASE" 
• 211 • 
in the afternoons, but I hadn't mentioned this because I felt my wife would 
reject the idea. Then yesterday Jane promised to hold a session today, after 
Td said that a session might help. 
(The day was warm — in the 60's — and rainy at times. The windows were wide open so that traffic noise hit us. Down the hall somewhere a 
woman was shouting periodically — a display that took a lot of work and 
energy after a few hours. One of the nurses called her "a pain in the ass," 
then laughed when she added that the woman did have hemorrhoids. But 
to me her unintelligible shouting signaled more than a physical affliction.) 
Now, I bid you another fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
This is not dictation. 
Ruburt's recent discomfort is partially caused by the fear that his 
body will not be able to completely heal itself, even if he does 
uncover all of the reasons for his predicament. 
The fears have been there, of course, and your latest efforts 
simply brought them into prominence, or cast a spodight upon 
them. This can be countered if Ruburt stresses the idea that he is 
indeed couched safely, and that his existence is automatically, spontaneously held. That idea of safety and reassurance counters the fear, 
and opens the passageways again for free association. 
This session should help to minimize that discomfort, which is 
often so apparent during your visits — precisely when he wants to be 
at his best. In other words, he is trying too hard. Each of his activities 
can indeed flow easily one into the other, and he should remind himself that the inner intelligence within him is indeed on its own always 
seeking his best interest, and always of itself working on his behalf. 
If he wants to, have him imagine this inner intelligence as a 
beloved parent. This will also dull the edges of any resentments he 
may have regarding his own parents. 
I may return briefly, but in any case I do now activate those coordinates that do increase feelings of self-love, exuberance, and well-being. 
(3:45.1 read the session to Jane twice. I worked on mail acknowledging 
the $650 we'd received in contributions through Maude Cardwett's efforts. 
Of course, we noticed that Seth had said that Jane's discomfort was only 
partially caused by her fears that she cannot heal herself. What about those 
other reasons, then? Jane said later that she thought Seth would indeed 
return. Resume at 4:16.) 
• 2 1 2 TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
The other reason for his discomfort has to do with his birthday, 
coupled with the idea of Mother's Day, which is tomorrow. 
The idea of Mother's Day made him half resentful and half sorrowful because of the poor relationship between him and his mother 
(longpause), and he had hoped for further improvements in time for 
his birthday. 
Certainly he does believe that his body can begin to feel better 
and better — and that suggestion is a good one to use, for it implies 
continuance of input, without getting involved in absolutes. 
(4:20.1 read the session to her. She felt Seth around again. 4:23.) 
He does not have anything new "wrong" with his body. Such fears 
show that the distrust of the body is still to some extent present, so he 
should refresh his memory on the connections between femininity, 
his physical body, and health. 
I did want to mention that the circulation of our books is definitely increasing, and will continue to do so. 
Once again I bid you a fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth. " 
(4:26 P.M. I read the last half of the session to Jane. "I got the feeling 
there was something definitely involved in the increase in the circulation of 
our books," Jane said when I was through. The mail has picked up quite a 
bit, and at the moment Fm falling behind again. 
(I felt depressed after today's session, for it seemed to me that Jane still 
hasn't shaken her fears, especially her distrust of her oton body and its 
processes, after all this time. I sato the birthday/Mother's Day hassle as only 
the latest wrinkle in a 20-year cycle of reasons for the symptoms. The question isn't why she's so uncomfortable these days, but why the body, the 
psyche, has chosen to endure those symptoms for so long.) 
CHAPTER 7 
THE STATE OF CHILDHOOD IN 
RELATIONSHIP TO HEALTH, AND 
HINTS FOR PARENTS 
MAY 13,1984 
3:10 P.M. SUNDAY 
arte called last night with Carta's help. Today was warm — about 63 
degrees — as I drove to 330. It was also rainy, and rained heavily 
later in the afternoon. I got no work done on Dreams, and may not get 
much done tomorrow. If the weather is decent I'll have to mow grass. I 
would also like to do some painting, but this seems impossible at this time. 
(Jane read yesterday 's session for herself and I helped her; she said 
nothing about my own notes for it. She didn't eat well for either lunch or 
supper. And this morning she did ask for Darvoset to ease her discomfort. 
She was already on her back when I got to 330 today. Georgia had put her 
there, and had also ivashed Jane's hair this morning. It looked good.) 
I bid you another fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
Dictation. 
We will begin the next chapter, which is to be called: "The State 
of Childhood in Relationship to Health, and Hints for Parents." 
(Longpause.) For adults, ideas of health and illness are intimately 
connected with philosophical, religious, and social beliefs. They are 
even more entangled with scientific concepts, and with science's 
views of life in general. Children, however, are far more innocent, 
• 2 1 3 • 2 1 4 TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
and though they respond to the ideas of their parents, still their 
minds are open and filled with curiosity. They are also gifted with an 
almost astounding resiliency and exuberance. 
They possess an innate love of the body and all of its parts. They 
also feel an eager desire to learn all they can about their own physical sensations and capabilities. 
At the same time, young children in particular still possess a feeling of oneness with the universe, and with all of life, even as they begin 
to separate themselves at certain levels from life's wholeness to go 
about the delightful task. Seeing themselves as separate and apart from 
all other individuals, they still retain an inner comprehension and a 
memory of having once experienced a oneness with life as a whole. 
(3:21.) At that level even illness is regarded simply as a part of 
life's experience, however unpleasant it might be. Even at an early 
age, children joyfully explore all of the possibilities of all sensations 
possible within their framework — pain as well as joy, frustration as 
well as satisfaction, and all the while their awareness is propelled by 
curiosity, wonder, and joy. 
They pick up their first ideas about health and disease from parents and doctors, and by the actions of those people to their own discomfiture. Before they can even see, children are already aware of 
what their parents expect from them in terms of health and disease, 
so that early patterns of behavior are formed, to which they then 
react in adulthood. 
You may take a break. I may or may not return, but I do activate 
those coordinates that accelerate your own healing processes and 
well-being. 
(3:26. I did a few letters, thanking people who have contributed to 
Jane's hospital fund. Carla took Jane's temperature — 98.4.1 read the last 
sentence to my wife. Resume at 3:44.) 
For now we will speak of children who possess ordinary good health, 
but who may also have some of the usual childhood "diseases." Later 
we will discuss children with exceptionally severe health conditions. 
Many children acquire poor health habits through the wellmeaning mistakes of their parents. This is particularly true when parents actually reward a child for being ill. In such cases, the ailing 
child is pampered far more than usual, given extra special attention, 
offered delicacies such as ice cream, let off some ordinary chores, 
THE STATE OF CHILDHOOD 
• 215 • 
and in other ways encouraged to think of bouts of illness as times of 
special attention and reward. 
I do not mean that ill children should not be treated with kindness, and perhaps a bit of special attention — but the reward should 
be given for the child's recovery, and efforts should be made to keep 
the youngster's routine as normal as possible. Children often know 
quite well the reasons for some of their illnesses, for often they learn 
from their parents that illness can be used as a means to achieve a 
desired result. 
Often parents hide such behavior from themselves. They deliberately close their eyes to some of the reasons for their own illnesses, 
and this behavior has become so habitual that they are no longer 
conscious of their own intent. 
Children, however, may be quite conscious of the fact that they 
willed themselves to become ill, in order to avoid school, or an examination, or a coming feared family event. They soon learn that such 
self-knowledge is not acceptable, however, so they begin to pretend 
ignorance, quickly learning to tell themselves instead that they have 
a bug or a virus, or have caught a cold, seemingly for no reason at all. 
Parents frequently foster such behavior. Some are simply too busy 
to question a child about his own illness. It is far simpler to give a child 
aspirin, and send a child to bed with ginger ale and a coloring book. 
Such procedures unfortunately rob a child of important selfknowledge and understanding. They begin to feel victims to this or 
that disorder. Since they have no idea that they themselves caused 
the problem to begin with, then they do not realize that they themselves possess the power to right the situation. If they are being 
rewarded for such behavior in the meantime, then the pressure is 
less, of course, so that bouts of illness or poor health can become 
ways of attaining attention, favorite status, and reward. 
Parents who are aware of these facts can start helping their children at an early age by asking them simply the reasons for their illness. 
A mother might say: 'You don't need to have a temperature in order 
to avoid school, or as a way of getting love and attention, for I love you 
in any case. And if there is a problem at school, we can work it out 
together, so you don't have to make yourself ill." Again, the reasons 
for such behavior are often quite clear in the child's mind. So if the 
parents begin such questioning and reassurance when the child is 
• 2 1 6 TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
young, then the youngster will learn that while illness may be used to 
attain a desired result, there are far better, healthier ways of achieving 
an end result. 
Some parents, unfortunately, use the nature of suggestion in the 
most undesirable way, so that a child is often told that he or she is 
sickly, or weak or overly sensitive, and not as robust as other youngsters. If that kind of behavior is continued, then the child soon takes 
such statements as true, and begins to act upon them, until they do 
indeed become only too real in the youngster's everyday experience. 
End of dictation. 
End of session. I bid you a most fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth." 
(4:13 P.M. For some reason I didn't read the session to Jane. She was 
still uncomfortable, so I turned her on her side earlier than usual. She 
called, with Carta's help, around 9:25, as I was typing this session, and 
said she felt better.) 
MAY 14,1984 
3:32 P.M. MONDAY 
(The clay was much cooler and rainy. Jane was on her back again when 
I got to 330. The fan was on part of the time because of the exceptional 
humidity, though. She seemed to be a little more comfortable, now that her 
birthday and Mother's Day are past — factors, Seth said, that contributed 
to her discomfort.) 
Now — I bid you another most fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
We will resume dictation. 
(Very long pause.) Good health is closely related, of course, to a 
family's beliefs about the body. If parents believe that the body is 
somehow an inferior vehicle for the spirit, or if they simply view the 
body as unreliable or weak and vulnerable, then children will at an 
early age begin to consider good health as a rarity, and learn to take 
depression, poor spirits, and bodily aches and pains to be a natural, 
normal condition of life. 
If, on the other hand, parents view the body as a healthy, dependable vehicle of expression and feeling, then their children will look 
at their own bodies in the same fashion. It is very important that 
THE STATE OF CHILDHOOD 
• 217 • 
parents express a fond affection toward each other, and toward their 
children. In this way most children are assured of their parents' love, 
and hence need not resort to illness as a way of gaining attention or 
testing a parents' love and devotion. 
There is no natural reason for children to feel a sense.of shame 
concerning any bodily part. No portion of the body should be 
spoken about in secret, hushed tones. Each child should be told that 
his body, or her body, is a precious private possession, however, so 
that it is easy to build up a desirable feeling of bodily privacy, without 
any hint of shame or guilt. 
It goes without saying that parents should hold the bodies of 
their male and female children in equal favor, so that one is not considered inferior to the other. Each child should be educated as early 
as possible by their parents, so that the youngsters are repeatedly 
reminded of the body's natural resources and healing abilities. 
(Longpause.) Parents who are actually quite worried about their 
childrens' susceptibility to illness often go overboard, stressing all 
kinds of sports and sports-related projects, but the children sense 
their parents' unspoken fears, and they try to reassure their parents 
through achieving high goals or merit in sports programs. 
There is no area of thought or belief that does not touch upon 
the subject of health in one way or another. Therefore, throughout 
this book we will be devoted to many ideas that may at first seem 
unrelated to the topic at hand. 
End of dictation. 
(3:51.) Again, it is a good idea for Ruburt to remind himself of 
the connections between his idea of his body and its relationship to 
his sexuality and to health. This will help him uncover the reasons for 
his distrust of the body, so that he can begin to feel a new sense of the 
body's reliability, resourcefulness, and powerful healing abilities. 
I may or may not return this afternoon, but I do again accelerate 
your own healing abilities, and quicken those coordinates that accelerate your own sense of well-being and safety. 
("Thank you." 
(3:55.1 read the session to Jane. She had been interrupted twice by hospital staff while delivering it. It should be noted that before today's session, 
she read yesterday's session very well, indeed —fast and easily.) 
• 218TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
MAY 15,1984 
4:32 P.M. TUESDAY 
(Jane was a bit more comfortable lying on her back today, though not a 
great deal She ate little lunch — or supper, for that matter. But she did 
very well reading a couple of sessions. I said I was seriously considering 
giving up ansivering most of the fan mail, which has increased considerably lately. Fm having more and more trouble getting free time to concentrate upon getting Dreams done. 
(The ulcer on Jane's right knee is showing definite signs of healing, 
and closing up on the inside — more so than on her knuckle on the left 
hand. 
(We hacl the fan on and the windows wide open, although it wasn't 
that hot outside. Jane's Seth voice was stronger than usual. I might add 
that I had my "eye thing" throughout the session — those bright, jaggecl 
patterns moving across my field of vision. 1 described the effect, and added 
a drawing of it, in Jane's Adventures in Consciousness, which was published in 1975. Today's episode ivas the first in a long while, triggered I 
believe by stress, yet it didn't last long. I didn't take the lime to use the pendulum to learn more.) 
Now — I bid you another most fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
This is not dictation. 
It will help considerably if Ruburt discusses his mistrust of the 
body with you — thus expressing those feelings within the framework of your relationship. 
The feelings should not be treated with disapproval, for it is, of 
course, because Ruburt disapproves of such feelings that he often 
keeps them hidden. Expressed in such a manner, they may indeed 
elicit tears on Ruburt's part — and perhaps on your own as well. 
Ruburt should actually address those feelings sympathetically, 
explaining to them where they came from. This allows the emotions 
some clear resolution. He may even refer to those feelings of distrust 
as a dear frightened part of himself, and then, again, address that 
part of the self sympathetically — telling it why it need no longer be 
frightened, and vocally and emotionally stressing the fact that the 
frightened portion of the self no longer needs defenses, but can now 
allow itself free and natural expression. 
THE STATE OF CHILDHOOD 
• 219 • 
These suggestions, carried out, can be of more than considerable value. Tell Ruburt I will begin book dictation again at our next 
session, including the material on "better and better pills." 
I bid you both then a fond afternoon, and again I accelerate your 
own healing abilities, and quicken your own sense of well-being and 
peace of mind. The suggestions I have given are quite potent. 
("Thank you." 
(4:40 P.M. "Well, Tm glad I did that,"Jane said. "TU have a smoke 
while you read it to me." She'd been interrupted right after the start of the 
session by a nurse bringing her vitamin C. Recording the session, I'd been 
quite amazed that a certain frightened portion ofJane's self could exert such 
power over the rest of her mental and physical personality. Then I thought 
that perhaps I wasn't amazed at all — that such things could be old stuff 
to therapists following various psychological disciplines. Once again, I 
ended up depressed. 
(Jane picked up on this, for she said that I would disapprove. I said it 
would be useless to deny the existence of her symptoms. And she replied that 
she could already feel the emotions connected with the Seth material today. I 
thought that tomorrow we could do something about that, then realized that 
Jim Baker, our optometrist, was due after 2:00 P.M. to deliver the two new 
pair of glasses he'd examined Jane for some lime ago. That was prime time 
for us to try free association, yet Jane had to have the glasses. 
(Just as I turned Jane on her side after the session, our neighbor Joe 
Bumbalo — who is very ill -with cancer — called to invite me to share Chinese food and rhubarb pie with him and his wife, Margaret. I didn't get to 
their house until after 7:30 because I'd been trying to help Jane get more 
comfortable. The food ivas delicious — until two pieces of chicken became 
lodged in my throat as I talked. Joe, lying on his couch, saw me trying to 
swallow, and called Margaret from the kitchen. I could still breathe, but 
with difficulty as my throat muscles kept trying to down the meat. I knew the 
situation could get very serious, but none of us panicked. Margaret, who 
had been a school nurse, used the Heimlich maneuver: she ivrapped her 
strong arms around me from the back and squeezed. On the third squeeze, 
one portion of the chicken popped out of my mouth. I could talk hoarsely 
while feeling the second portion work its way down my esophagus. To the 
Bumbalos' surprise, 1 finally was able to finish the meal. In a flash I'd been 
prepared for Margaret to use all force necessary, even to the point of one or 
• 220 • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
more broken ribs, as I'd read could happen. And in bed that night, I wondered what would have happened to Jane had I not survived . . .) 
MAY 18,1984 
3:48 P.M. FRIDAY 
(Last night when I got home, I saw that the young fellow Frank Longwell has put me in touch with to do the lawn had done his job; the place 
looked great This afternoon he was to come back and do the raking. 
(Jane was on her back again when I got there. She seemed to feel a little 
mare comfortable. After an average lunch she read the last two sessions for 
her, wearing her new closeup glasses, and zipped right through them. I told 
her I think that now she can read aloud faster than I can. 
(The mail from Prenlice-FIall is increasing considerably, whether or not 
this is in line with Seth's recent statement that an increase in sales of the 
books is under way. Batches of fan mail have arrived the last three days. 
Already Fm way behind, and feel that Fll never get it answered. In fact, 
today was the first day in 330 that I didn 't answer at least a few letters from 
readers. It gave me a strange feeling of freedom; the afternoon seemed 
stretched out, or longer. I believe Fm on the point of renouncing the fan 
mail, or most of it. Perhaps Fll take the time from Dreams to work out a 
final fan letter — including Seth's — to send folks who write. One I can 
sign, and that's it. 
(This material is free-association stuff following Seth's suggestion in 
the private session forJane on May 15. We're to discuss her mistrust of her 
physical body, and related subjects. We'd have tried it yesterday, except that 
Jim Baker brought her the new glasses. What follows is obviously simplified 
and shorter, since I couldn't record every spoken word between us. We 
wanted to tap into the hidden emotions behind the words. 
(Much of this we've gone over before, at various times. Jane began by talking about how her mother, Marie, told her at puberty that she hacl bad blood 
in herfrom her father [Delmer], that he had syphilis. Jane was frightened at 
having her periods ancl talked to a nun about all of it — and the nun would 
have her oivn hangups, probably; Jane didn't say, or perhaps remember. 
(She also recounted how she didn't have to take gym in school because 
of her periods, ancl how Marie saicl Del had bad eyes because of the syphilis 
and couldn't read. Jane remembers all of those feelings, yet doesn't feel them, 
THE STATE OF CHILDHOOD 
• 221 • 
she said. She was very afraid to get pregnant, and never fooled around. 
After our marriage she was afraid of being pregnant, thinking it would 
wreck our careers. I reminded her that when she did get pregnant, I hadn 't 
been terribly upset, and accepted it. She felt the men didn't pay her serious 
attention at the science-fiction conference 27 years ago because she was a 
woman. The same with the psychic stuff: a hysterical woman. She felt that 
men were superior to women. 
(She identified luith writing poetry very early in life. "I believed what I 
wrote, but people said Td groto out of it and have kids, and I was determined not to."Had trouble sharing poetry with most boyfriends; smarter to 
play dumb, she discovered. Marie had always encouraged her poetry, and 
the two women shared it for a number of years. Jane used to write poems to 
get back in Marie's good grace: "At the same time I felt like I was betraying 
myself for doing it. I remember that quite well." I didn 'I remember Jane 
telling me this before, though she might have. 
(Jane was terrified a couple of times that she might be pregnant by me. 
Yet except for one time in a passionate moment she never had any urge to 
have a child. "But I certainly felt the feminine part of you was the part you 
couldn't trust," she said. As we talked about these things she said she was 
getting edgy and nervous, and wanted a cigarette, so we were getting close 
to buried feelings. 
(I asked her about Seth, a male, speaking through a woman. She said 
she suspected that as a woman she'cl have more authority if she spoke as a 
male. She "sensed a feeling of duplicity" in the beginning of the sessions. I 
don't remember this either. Again she was getting nervous, her voice almost 
teary. She recalled that once Seth said that if he'd come through as a woman 
she wouldn 'I have stood for it. All of this male business is related to the male 
priests in her childhood years. 
(About the envelope tests — Seth had to be almost omnipotent — 
because she transferred the authority of the church to him. An important 
point, and a new one, I think. Again Jane was nervous and edgy, near 
crying. But the church wouldn't approve of Seth, I saicl. Enter the idea of 
she starting a false church — heretical indeed — with a false god, Seth. 
The Catholic idea of penance was mixed in here. I added that since she 
wanted to use the abilities instead of denying them, as the church would 
want her to do, she chose to continue her menial rebellion and so had to pay 
penance physically, through the symptoms. The creative part of her poetry 
• 2 2 2 TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
had always been trying to go beyond where the church wanted it to go. A 
neat circle, with no way out, I said. Jane saicl she felt like she could chew 
nails. She was very uncomfortable, but no tears. 
(We talked a lot about the priests in her life, and the conflicts her work 
set up with their early teachings, and their personal behavior, good ancl 
bad. Jane remembered no reaction from her mother when her poetry came 
into conflict with the church, or when Father Rakin burned her books. I 
thought this strange. 
(3:35. She was again nervous and edgy, ancl had another smoke. She 
talked about having a session to put it all together. She described again all 
those visits from Father Trenton. She talked about how the one priest who 
put her to bed when she was but 3 or 4 years old would "play " with her sexually, and how Marie finally figured that out. This was the one who called 
her up while we lived together; he was old ancl living in a retirement home 
south of Pennsylvania, 1 believe. She described how Father Trenton sat with 
his back to Marie when he ivas mad at the mother, ancl how Father Rakin 
made advances to her. She grew up in a male-dominated world. The first 
lime they met, Jane said Father Rakin said to her when she was but 13: 
"You're just too forward." A nice greeting and one Jane obviously still 
remembers. She realized today, while talking, that her grandfather had no 
love for women either. And Marie saicl to her: "You were a nice kid until you 
turned about sixteen — then you turned into a bitch." Several times in 
Florida she thought I was going to leave her. I wasn 't. 
(Jane was frightened when her mother read cards or tea leaves. She 
remembers her mother making predictions that came true — but how many 
did she make, I asked, that didn't pan out? Probably hundreds. 
(All of the above isfree-association materialfor Thursday, May 17,1984.) 
u 
(Flere is the session for May 18, 1984:) 
Now I bid you another fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
This is dictation. 
I have mentioned before that play is essential for growth and 
development. Children learn through play-acting. They imagine 
themselves to be in all kinds of situations. They see themselves in 
dangerous predicaments, and then conjure up their own methods of 
THE STATE OF CHILDHOOD 
• 223 • 
escape. They try out the roles of other family members, imagine 
themselves rich and poor, old and young, male and female. 
This allows children a sense of freedom, independence, and 
power as they see themselves acting forcibly in all kinds of situations. 
It goes without saying that physical play automatically helps develop 
the body and its capabilities. 
To a child, play and work are often one and the same thing, and 
parents can utilize imaginative games as a way of reinforcing ideas of 
health and vitality. When a child is ill-disposed or cranky, or has a 
headache, or another disorder that does not appear to be serious, 
parents can utilize this idea: have the child imagine that you are 
giving it a "better and better pill." Have the child open its mouth 
while you place the imaginary pill on its tongue, or have the child 
imagine picking the pill up and placing it in its mouth. Then give the 
child a glass of water to wash the pill down, or have the child get the 
water for himself or herself. Then have the youngster chant, say, 
three times, Tve taken a better and better pill, so I will shortly feel 
better and better myself." 
The earlier such a game is begun the better, and as the child 
grows older you may explain that often an imaginary pill works quite 
as well — if not better — than a real one. 
This does not mean that I am asking parents to substitute imaginary medicine for real medicine, though indeed, I repeat, it may be 
quite as effective. In your society, however, it would be almost impossible to get along withovit medicine or medical science. 
While I want to emphasize that point, I also want to remind you 
that innately and ideally the body is quite equipped to heal itself, 
and certainly to cure its own momentary headache. You would have 
to substitute an entirely different learning system, at your present 
stage, for the body to show its true potentials and healing abilities. 
(4:05.) In other cases of a child's illness, have the child play a 
healing game, in which he or she playfully imagines being completely healthy again, outdoors and playing; or have the youngster 
imagine a conversation with a friend, describing the illness as past 
and gone. Play could also be used even in old peoples' homes, for it 
could revive feelings of spontaneity and give the conscious mind a 
rest from worrying. 
• 2 2 4 TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
Many ancient and so-called primitive peoples utilized play — 
and drama, of course — for their healing values, and often their 
effects were quite as therapeutic as medical science. If your child 
believes that a particular illness is caused by a virus, then suggest a 
game in which the youngster imagines the virus to be a small bvig 
that he or she triumphantly chases away with a broom, or sweeps out 
the door. Once a child gets the idea, the youngster will often make 
up his or her own game, that will prove most beneficial. 
Instead of such procedures, children are often taught to believe 
that any situation or illness or danger will worsen, and that the least 
desirable, rather than the most desirable, solution will be found. By 
such mental games, however, stressing the desirable solution, children can learn at an early age to utilize their imaginations and their 
minds in a far more beneficial manner. 
Take a brief break, and we will continue. 
(4:16. Jane had a smoke. Resume at 4:23.) 
One of the most disastrous ideas is the belief that illness is sent as 
a punishment by God. 
Unfortunately, such a belief is promoted by many religions. Children who want to be good, therefore, can unfortunately strive for 
poor health, in the belief that it is a sign of God's attention. To be 
punished by God is often seen as preferable to being ignored by 
God. Adults who hold such views unwittingly often let their children 
in for a life of turmoil and depression. 
In all cases of illness, games or play should be fostered whenever 
possible, and in whatever form. Many dictatorial religions pointedly 
refuse to allow their congregations to indulge in any type of play at 
all, and frown upon it as sinful. Card-playing and family games such 
as Monopoly are actually excellent practices, and play in any form 
encourages spontaneity and promotes healing and peace of mind. 
End of dictation. 
(4:29.) Some playful behavior on Ruburt's part would be of considerable benefit — and this would be even better if the two of you 
could possibly indulge in some kind of play together, even if only 
mind games were involved — games with no particular purpose, 
except fun. 
Some version involving you two and the French book, for example. 
THE STATE OF CHILDHOOD 
• 225 • 
Again, I activate those coordinates that quicken health, healing, 
and that revive high spirits. I bid you then a most fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth." 
(4:32 P.M. It was getting windy outside, and cooler, and was clouding 
over. "To tell you the truth, I was so uncomfortable I didn 9t think I coulcl 
have a session,"Jane saicl. She had a cigarette before I turned her. We 
thought of games involving the French book, or even crossword puzzles. In 
the ash tree just starting to get leaves beside the windows of330, I saw a 
tiny yellow bird flitting about among the branches. I pointed it out to Jane, 
but she couldn 9t quite see it, except for a flash of color. Fd seen the same bird, 
I think, yesterday afternoon also. 
(The book referred to is a French-English textbook fromJane's days at Skidmore College, in Saratoga springs, New York. Several years ago Jane had 
started reviewing her knowledge of French, and I had asked her to teach me a 
bit about the language. Fun, but neither one of us had stayed with our ideas.) 
CHAPTER 8 
CHILDRENS' PLAY, REINCARNATION, AND HEALTH 
MAY 22,1984 
4:24 P.M. TUESDAY 
ere is a brief summary offree-association material given at 4:20 P.M. 
on May 20, 1984: 
(Jane discussed a positive, energetic dream of last night, which isn't 
recorded here. She said that last night's dream sequences were her celebration 
of her bodily abilities — her insistence on the excellent workings of the body. 
She thinks she hasn't used the abilities of her body. "I asked it to forgive me 
for not doing that. I gave it the freedom to move — and here I am uncomfortable as hell all afternoon." 
(Could her uneasy state be a sign of the body's responding? She used to 
think that "if I used my body all the way, I wouldn't work — which is hysterical, because now I do hardly any thing." She doesn 'I know if her body 
can fully recover, yet she really believes that she can straighten out her 
broken leg. I suggested that instead she realize that her good left leg is now 
in a position to straighten out. She hadn't thought of that. She does now 
think that it's safe to recover physically. 
(Jane felt with some emotion — she refused to think about it — that 
she's embarked on some project involving her entity at this later time in her 
life. This was as a result of my question. She thinks it's possible. 
CHILDRENS' P LAY, RE IN CARNATION, AND HEALTH 
• 227 • 
(Punishment 
We have to explore that concept much more. Jane uses 
suggestions — she's asked her mother to forgive her, and vice versa, ancl she 
forgives herself. I think punishment is almost certainly involved. Jane 
became quite nervous and edgy as we talked about this, so I know there's 
something there.) 
u 
(Several times this afternoon Jane told me that she'd picked up Seth's 
title for the next chapter of his book. She also said she'cl like to resume giving 
predictions again.) 
Now I bid you another fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
We will begin a new chapter, to be entitled: "Childrens* Play, 
Reincarnation, and Health." 
Give us a moment... When children play, often the play events 
seem as real or even more real than ordinary physical events that are 
experienced outside of the play framework. Children playing at cowboys and Indians, or cops and robbers, can on occasion become 
quite as frightened by the pursuit or the chase as they would be if 
they were actually caught up in such an adventure in ordinary life. 
Children then apply their imaginations more vividly, and even 
utilize all of their senses at certain times, to follow or reinforce those 
pictures that imagination paints. There are indeed many kinds of 
reality, many versions, and it is some time before human beings learn 
to focus into one particular package of reality. 
In so doing, they then apply their imaginations in structured 
ways that serve to reinforce the prime reality-framework. For some 
time, however, young children utilize a remarkable imaginative freedom, so that, for example, they can experience "alternate" events 
with as much focus, strength, and vitality as that with which they 
experience ordinary life. A potent daydream may, in fact, appear far 
more real than the other daily events that surround it. When the 
child is playing, its sense of joy or anger or danger is very strongly 
felt. The child's body will often reflect those conditions and reflexes 
that would be elicited if the so-called "play" events were real. 
Most of your experience happens direcdy, where senses, imagination, motion and physical actuality meet. In dreams, however, you 
• 228TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
often feel as if you are in another location entirely, and all of your 
senses seem pivoted in that location. Your experience is separated 
from your usual living area, in other words. You may dream that you 
are running or walking or flying, yet those activities are divorced 
enough from that area where imagination, motion, and physical 
actuality meet, so that your body remains quiet, relatively speaking, 
while you seem to be moving freely somewhere else. 
(4:40.) In a fashion, reincarnation can partially be explained 
using the same kind of analogy. You have many existences at once — 
but each one has its own living area, upon which that portion of you 
focuses. In fact, that portion has its own name and selfhood and is 
master of its own castle, so to speak. 
Each self has its own inviolate point where imagination, motion, 
and physical actuality intersect. Like the child play-acting, however, 
events occur within events, all dramatically real and vivid, all eliciting 
specific responses and actions, and each one possessing its own private living area (intently). 
End of dictation. 
(4:44 .) I did want to begin the chapter. Again I activate those coordinates that encourage your own healing abilities, peace of mind, revelations, and understanding — and I bid you a fond good afternoon. 
("Thank you. * 
(4:45 P.M. Jane has again been very uncomfortable today, especially 
lying on her back. She took Darvoset this morning and again this afternoon 
when I was there.) 
MAY 23,1984 
4:31 P.M. WEDNESDAY 
(This morning I finished making the portable reading stand forJane to 
use in bed, and took it in to 330 this afternoon. Jane could use it after a 
fashion, but not as well as Td hoped. It will help, though. She's still very 
uncomfortable at limes, and is noio on four-hour doses of Darvoset.) 
Now I bid you another fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
We will resume dictation. 
On any given day a youngster may take a ride on a merry-goround. The same little boy or girl might also sit astride a toy horse, 
CHILDRENS' P LAY, RE IN CARNATION, AND HEALTH 
• 229 • 
and pretend that the horse is part of the merry-go-round. The same 
child might see the image of a merry-go-round on the television 
screen, or be told about another youngster's visit to a playground, 
and a subsequent ride on a merry-go-round. 
The child will be completely absorbed in the merry-go-round 
ride that was directly experienced. He or she may indeed be just as 
engrossed — or even more so — in the imaginary ride on the rocking horse. There will be some involvement, of course, as the child 
watches the images of the merry-go-round horses on the television 
station, while the story about another child's visit to the playground 
will not take nearly as much of his interest. 
In somewhat the same way, events appear and are reflected in 
reincarnational existences. All the lives are actually occurring at the 
same time, as the hypothetical youngster's merry-go-round experiences happened all in one day. 
In the reincarnational terms, however, the merry-go-round 
events might be experienced directly in some existences, or appear 
in a dream in another existence, or turn up simply as an image in 
another, or happen in an event involving real horses instead of merrygo-round horses. In other words, in one way or another the events of 
one living experience are reflected in each other living experience. 
(4:42.) I am not saying that the events in one life cause the events 
in another, but that there is an overall pattern — a bank of probable 
events — and that in each life each individual chooses those that suit 
his or her overall private purposes. Yet those lives will be connected. 
An individual may have a serious illness in one life. That event may 
turn up as one uncomfortable nightmare in another existence. In 
still another life, the individual might have a dear friend who suffers 
from the same disease. In still another existence the individual might 
decide to be a doctor, to seek a cause and a cure for the same disease. 
No one is fated, however, to suffer in one life for any crimes committed in another. The reasons and purposes for one's own existence 
in any life can be found directly in the life itself. 
(Long pause. The last sen tence echoes what I wrote in one of the essays 
for Dreams.) 
End of dictation. 
(4:48.) I bid you a most fond good afternoon. I wanted to continue 
dictation, even though the session was brief. Once more I activate 
• 230TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
those coordinates that quicken your own healing potentials, and promote well-being and peace of mind. 
(4:49 P.M. "Well, I guess that's it,"Jane said. She had a cigarette before 
I turned her on her left side. She was uncomfortable.) 
MAY 26,1984 
4:03 P.M. SATURDAY 
(Yesterday I received in the mail a copy of a long article that Sam 
Menahem, a psychologist in Fort Lee, New Jersey, has written for a summer 
issue of Reality Change. I took the article in to 330 today so that Jane 
could read it. Dr. Menahem very favorably compares the Seth material with 
a number of psychological disciplines, and I told Jane I hoped his feature 
would shoto her that the general validity of her work would continue to 
grow. She liked the. article, and agreed that her work ivould continue to grow 
in influence. 
(As I was doing mail today she said she'd put off having sessions lately 
because she'd picked up from me that I wanted the time off to catch up on 
other things. True. But I told her that I was ready for a session today if she 
wanted to have one.) 
I bid you another most fond good afternoon — 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
— and I will resume dictation. 
Many proponents of reincarnation believe most firmly that an illness in one life most frequendv has its roots in a past existence, and 
that reincarnational regression is therefore necessary to uncover the 
reasons for many current illnesses or dilemmas. 
There is also a rather conventional stereotype version of karma 
that may follow such beliefs. Therefore, you may be punished in this 
life for errors you have committed in a past one, or you may actually 
be making up for a mistake made thousands of years ago. Again, all 
of a person's reincarnational existences are, indeed, connected — 
but the events in one life do not cause the events in the next one. 
I must remind you once more that all time happens simultaneously, so the confused belief about punishment now, in retaliation 
for past action would actually be meaningless, since in simultaneous 
time all actions would be occurring at once. 
CHILDRENS' P LAY, RE IN CARNATION, AND HEALTH 
• 231 • 
(Long pause.) You may have overall reasons for a particular illness, however, that have nothing to do with crime or punishment, 
but may instead involve an extraordinary sense of curiosity, and the 
desire for experience that is somewhat unconventional — usually 
not sought for — exotic, or in certain terms even grotesque. 
Each life, regardless of its nature, possesses it own unique vantage 
point, and an individual may sometimes take an obscure or a longlasting disease simply to present himself or herself with experience that 
most others would shun. An individual might seek such a vantage point 
in order to look at the universe in a different fashion, asking questions 
that perhaps could not be answered if asked from any other position. 
(4:16.) Another life, for example, might deal with exquisite 
health and vitality, and as mentioned, still another life might be 
devoted to the arts of healing — but overall, few people take health 
problems per se as frequent reincarnational themes, though they 
may be implied strongly in situations where one is born into a large 
populace of poor, underprivileged people. 
If you do have health problems, it is much better to look for their 
reasons in your immediate experience, rather than assigning them a 
cause in the distant past. The reasons for maladies are almost always 
present in current life experience (longpause) — and even though old 
events from childhood may have originally activated unhealthy behavior, it is present beliefs that allow old patterns of activity to operate. 
Give us a moment, and we will continue. 
(4:22. Jane had a sip of coffee and a cigarette. Resume at 4:28.) 
If you are concerned about any given problems — mental, emotional, or physical — there are certain facts you should hold in 
mind. I have mentioned most of them elsewhere, but they are particularly vital in this context. 
New paragraph. You must realize that you do create your own 
reality because of your beliefs about it. Therefore, try to understand 
that the particular dilemma of illness is not an event forced upon 
you by some other agency. Realize that to some extent or another 
your dilemma or your illness has been chosen by you, and that this 
choosing has been done in bits and pieces of small, seemingly inconsequential choices. Each choice, however, has led up to your current 
predicament, whatever its nature. 
• 245TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
If you realize that your beliefs form your experience, then you do 
indeed have an excellent chance of changing your beliefs, and hence 
your experience. 
You can discover what your own reasons are for choosing the 
dilemma or illness by being very honest with yourself. There is no 
need to feel guilty since you meant very well as you made each 
choice — only the choices were built upon beliefs that were beliefs 
and not facts. 
We will continue dictation at our next session. For you both 
again, I activate those coordinates that quicken your own inspirations, revelations, and self-healing. 
("Thank you. * 
(4:44 P.M. Jane had been interrupted twice within three minutes since 
last break. "Gee, I felt these great big chunks of material there," she said. 
"And he's got even more, but it's getting late and the supper tray will be here 
and you have to turn me and s t u f f . .." I could tell she was able to continue. "I think he was also answering some of the points that psychologist 
made in his letter," she said. I'd had the same feeling. 
(She'd felt better today, which probably was one of the reasons for the 
longer session. She hasn't taken any Darvoset since this morning, which is 
an improvemen t. Jeff Harder has her on another vitamin supplement — a 
pungent colorless liquid that to me smells like orange peel. This since the 
blood test a few days ago. Jane dislikes the taste mightily.) 
MAY 28,1984 
4:08 P.M. MONDAY 
Now I bid you another most fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
And we will continue dictation. 
If you are in serious difficulties of any kind, it may at first seem 
inconceivable, unbelievable, or even scandalous to imagine that 
your problems are caused by your own beliefs. 
In fact, the opposite might appear to be true. You might have lost 
a series of jobs, for example, and it may seem quite clear that you are 
not to blame in any of those circumstances. You might have a very 
serious illness that seemed to come from nowhere, and it may strike 
CHILDRENS' P LAY, RE IN CARNATION, AND HEALTH 
• 233 • 
you as most unlikely indeed, that your own beliefs had anything to 
do with the inception of such a frightening malady. 
You may be in the middle of one or several very unsatisfactory 
relationships, none of which seem to be caused by you, while instead 
you feel as if you are an unwilling victim or participant. 
You may have a dangerous drug or alcohol problem, or you may 
be married to someone who does. In both instances the situations 
will be caused by your own beliefs, even though this may at first seem 
most unlikely. For the purposes of this particular chapter, we will discuss illnesses or situations that have arisen since childhood, so we are 
not including birth defects or very early life-endangering childhood 
accidents, or most unfortunate childhood family situations. These 
will be discussed separately. 
(Longpause at 4:19.) In most cases, even the most severe illnesses 
or complicated living conditions and relationships are caused by an 
attempt to grow, develop or expand in the face of difficulties that 
appear to be ^insurmountable to one degree or another. 
An individual will often be striving for some goal that appears 
blocked, and hence he or she uses all available energy and strength 
to circumnavigate the blockage. The blockage is usually a belief 
which needs to be understood or removed rather than bypassed. 
In this book we will be involved with the nature of beliefs and 
with various methods that will allow you to choose those beliefs that 
lead to a more satisfying life. 
Though this book is entitled The Way Toward Health, we are not 
speaking of physical health alone, but of mental, spiritual, and emotional health as well. You are not healthy, for example, no matter 
how robust your physical condition, if your relationships are 
unhealthy, unsatisfying, frustrating, or hard to achieve. Whatever 
your situation is, it is a good idea to ask yourself what you would do 
if you were free of it. An alcoholic's wife might wish with all her heart 
that her husband stop drinking — but if she suddenly asked herself 
what she would do, she might — surprisingly enough — feel a tinge 
of panic. On examination of her own thoughts and beliefs, she 
might well discover that she was so frightened of not achieving her 
own goals that she actually encouraged her husband's alcoholism, so 
that she would not have to face her own "failure." 
• 2 3 4 TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
Obviously this hypothetical situation is a quick example of what I 
mean, with no mention of the innumerable other beliefs and halfbeliefs that would encircle the man's and the woman's relationship. 
End of dictation. 
(4:36.) Once again, however, I do accelerate those coordinates that 
quicken your own healing abilities and inspirations and revelations. 
I do indeed look in on both of you frequendy, and now I bid you 
a most fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth." 
(4:37 P.M. "On those days when I don't feel like having a session, you 
can rest, "Jane said as we talked, "but on those days when I feel like having 
a session, I think I should do it — " 
("You feel like you should do it, or when you want to do it?" I asked. 
( "Well, both," she said. "The two go together. I want to do it when I want 
to do it," she laughed. She had a cigarette while I read her the session. I think 
it's an excellent one, and contains much that applies to our own situation, 
I'm sure.) 
CHAPTER 9 
Y o u , Y o u , Y o u , AND Y o u . LIVING AT CROSS PURPOSES 
MAY 29,1984 
4:00 P.M. TUESDAY 
I
bid you another fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
The next chapter, to be headed: 'You, You, You, and You. Living 
at Cross Purposes." 
(Longpause.) Each person is so unique that it is obviously impossible for me to discuss all of the innumerable and complicated 
strands of belief that form human experience — yet I hope here, 
some way, to present enough "specific generalizations" so that you 
the reader can find many points of application as far as your own life 
is concerned. 
In fact, you may discover not just one you, but several you's, so to 
speak, each pursuing certain purposes, and you may find out furthermore that some such purposes cancel others out, while some are 
diametrically opposed to each other. Such cross purposes, of course, 
can lead to mental, spiritual, physical and emotional difficulties. 
Many people believe that it is dangerous to make themselves 
known, to express their own ideas or abilities. Such individuals may 
be highly motivated, on the other hand, to become accomplished in 
some art or profession or other field of activity. In such cases you 
• 235 * 
• 236TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
have two cross-purposes operating — the desire to express oneself, 
and the fear of doing so. 
If both beliefs are equally dominant and vital, then the situation 
becomes quite serious. Such individuals may try "to get ahead" on 
the one hand, in society or business or in the arts or sciences, only to 
find themselves taking two steps backward for every step they take 
forward. In other words, they will encounter obstructions that are 
self-generated. If such a person begins to succeed, then he or she is 
forcibly reminded of the equally dominant need for lack of success — 
for again, the person believes that self-expression is necessary and 
desirable while also being highly dangerous, and thus to be avoided. 
(4:14.) Dilemmas result in many ways. The person might succeed 
financially, only to make a serious or faulty business judgment, thus 
losing the financial benefits. Another person might express the same 
dilemma through the body .itself, so that "getting ahead" was 
equated with physical mobility — so that it seemed that physical 
mobility, while so desired, was still highly dangerous. 
Such reasoning sounds quite oudandish, of course, to most individuals, but the person in question, say with a disease like arthritis, or 
some other motion-impairing ailment, might ask themselves the 
question: "What would I do if I were free of the condition?" 
Like the alcoholic's wife mentioned earlier, such a person might 
suddenly feel struck by a sense of panic, rather than relief, thus experiencing for the first time the fear of motion that underlay the problem. 
Yet why should motion be feared? Because so many individuals 
have been taught that power or energy is wrong, destructive, or 
sinful, and therefore to be punished. 
Often playful, rambunctious children are told not to be showoffs, 
or not to express their normal exuberance. Religions stress the 
importance of discipline, sobriety, and penance. All of these attitudes 
can be extremely detrimental, and along with other beliefs are 
responsible for a goodly number of spiritual, physical, mental, and 
emotional problems. 
Unfortunately, there are also some particular teachings that are 
sexually oriented, and that therefore show their effects often on one 
sex rather than the other. Boys are still taught to "be cool," unemotional, aggressive, and assertive — as opposed to being emotionally 
warm, cooperative, gregarious but without fake bravado. Boys are 
YOU. YOU. YOU. AND YOU. LIVING AT CROSS PURPOSES 
• 237 • 
taught that it is unmanly to be dependent in any way. They become 
embarrassed in late boyhood when kissed by their mothers, as a 
rule — yet it is quite natural to be both independent and dependent, cooperative and competitive. 
Such young men grow up with the desire to be independent, 
while at the same time they also experience the natural drive for 
cooperation and dependence upon others. Many end up punishing 
themselves for any behavior they consider dependent or unmanly. 
They are often afraid to express love, or to accept emotional nourishment gracefully. 
As a result some such people become severely afflicted with ulcers, 
so that their stomachs become sore and ulcerated at the acceptance 
of physical nourishment. 
I may or may not return, but I do indeed again accelerate those 
coordinates that lead to peace of body and mind. 
("Thank you." 
(4:33 P.M. Nobody, Jane noted as soon as she was out of trance, interrupted us for anything. I told Jane the session was again very good, like yesterday's; it's obvious that much of it fits our own situation. I heard a nurse 
pushing the medicine cart outside our door as we talked. After she'd taken 
her aspirin and Darvoset, Jane had a cigarette before I turned her. 
(Joe Bumbalo came back into the hospital this afternoon in preparation 
for his fourth dose of chemotherapy. I visited him after leaving Jane at 
7:00 P.M. He looked and talked much better. Joe expressed concern about 
how long he would live with his cancer. He also described a dream he's had 
often during the last three months, but hasn't told Margaret about. To me 
it sounded obviously symbolic of his fear of death and his battle against surrendering to it. He agreed with my explanation, which I offered quite diplomatically. In any case, I can hardly be all that sure that I'm correct.) 
MAY 30,1984 
4:15 P.M. WEDNESDAY 
(At the close of yesterday's session I wrote that I visited Joe Bumbalo 
after leavingjane at 7:00 P.M. While I was up in his room, 522, Margaret 
went down to say hello to Jane. Joe is due to go home Thursday morning. 
(Last night Jane was extremely uncomfortable lying on her back; the 
bedsore on her left hip bothered her endlessly, she said. She took Darvoset 
• 238 • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
and aspirin, but these didn't help. She was on her back when I got to 330 
today, and felt much better, although not at ease. I told her that at lunch 
time John Bumbalo had called and said that his father wouldn't be going 
home for a while: the doctor has found an infection in a lung. No one knew 
about this yesterday.) 
Now I bid you another most fond good afternoon — 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
— and we will resume dictation. 
(Long pause.) Epilepsy is a disease often experienced also by 
people who have strongly conflicting beliefs about the use of power 
or energy, coupled with a sometimes extraordinary amount of 
mental and physical energy that demands it be used. 
In many such cases the individuals involved are highly intellectual, and possess obvious gifts that are, however, seldom put to full 
use. Such people are so frightened of the nature of personal power 
and energy that they short-circuit their nervous systems, blocking 
the ability for any purposeful action, at least momentarily. 
Because they realize that they do indeed innately possess strong 
gifts and abilities, these people often seek attention for their disease, 
rather than for their abilities. They may become professional patients, 
favorites of their doctors because of their wit and repartee in the face 
of their affliction. These persons, however, again, are living at cross 
purposes. They are determined to express themselves and not to 
express themselves at the same time. Like so many others they believe 
that self-expression is dangerous, evil, and bound to lead to suffering — self-inflicted or otherwise. 
This particular group of people are also usually possessed by an 
extraordinary anger: they are furious at themselves for not being 
able to showcase their own strength and power — but "forced" 
instead into a kind of behavior that appears sometimes frightening 
and humiliating. 
(Long pause at 4:28.) Individuals who suffer from epilepsy are 
also often perfectionists — trying so hard to be at their best that they 
end up with a very uneven, jerky physical behavior. 
In some instances, stuttering is a very mild example of the same 
kind of activity. On the one hand some epileptic patients feel a cut 
above the usual run of humanity, while on the other they perform far 
YOU. YOU. YOU. AND YOU. LIVING AT CROSS PURPOSES 
• 239 • 
more awkwardly than normal persons. Again, many also believe that 
those with special talents or gifts are disliked by others and persecuted. 
Period. 
This brings us into a conglomeration of beliefs unfortunately 
connected with romanticism. 
Take a break and we will resume briefly. 
(4:34. Jane had a sip of coffee and a smoke. "Sometimes I feel like 
there's a chunk of material there, then other days there's nothing," she said. 
Resume at 4:41.) 
These beliefs are centered around artists, writers, poets, musicians, actors and actresses, or others who seem unusually gifted in 
the arts or in various other methods of self-expression. The beliefs 
lead to the most dire legends, in which the gifted person always pays 
in one way or another for the valued gifts of self-expression — 
through disaster, misfortune, or death. 
End of dictation. 
(4:44.) Ruburt's unfortunate evening was the result of his own 
fears about the body — related to the fact that he then picked up 
Joe's own dire fears, and these fueled his own. 
Margaret's visit was somewhat involved, as was your visit to Joe's 
room. 
It will be a good idea, even if it is not pleasant, for Ruburt to do 
some more free association in relationship to his fears about his 
body's performance — and those fears should not then be treated 
impatiently. They can and should be reasoned with, even if this 
means going over counter beliefs time and time again. 
I will also try to give you some further hints along those lines at 
our next session, and I bid you both now a fond good evening, and a 
comfortable and pleasant evening. 
("Thank you." 
(4:49 P.M.Joe discussed his fears with me last night when I visited him, 
but I didn't get a chance to tell Jane about them until I saw her in 330 this 
afternoon. In other words, she picked up Joe's fears herself, unless Margaret 
might have referred to them when she visited Jane last night after I'd left. 
(Note: Margaret didn't — instead, she told Jane that Joe felt so much 
better that the family planned to take him home Wednesday night, instead 
of Thursday morning.) 
• 253 • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
MAY 31,1984 
4:15 P.M. THURSDAY 
(On May 28, a nurse in hydro dropped an empty pan on Jane's left 
instep, making one of those depression cuts in the flesh. It hurt, Jane said. 
The spot is still sore, but is healing. This morning, Georgia and another 
aide banged Jane's right shin hard against the metal frame of the stretcher 
they put my wife on to take her to hydro. Jane screamed in pain, and Georgia cried. Jane at once began telling herself it all ivould be all right, and 
that appears to be the case. Although she has some pain in the lower leg and 
foot, and the area is tender to the touch, there are no wounds or discolorations. I noticed no signs of swelling when I got to 330 this noon. 
(Jane ate a quicker lunch than usual because I had to leave at 1:45 to 
go to the dentist. When I got back I told her I'd try free association with her, 
or a session. She said she didn't know if she was up to any free-association 
efforts — "though I do intend to try it, as Seth says." She had a better night 
last night, but is still quite uncomfortable on her back, and is on Darvoset 
and aspirin too. 
(I called Margaret Bumbalo in room 522 to see how Joe is. He was 
having a bone scan at the time. Margaret said he's grown considerably 
weaker than when he came into the hospital, though evidently the prognosis 
is okay.) 
I bid you another most fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
We will resume dictation. 
These concepts have many cousins, so that we actually have an 
entire family of beliefs that are all in one way or another related. 
Foremost, connected with the distortions about creativity and 
expression, is the belief that knowledge itself is dangerous, evil, and 
bound to lead to disaster. Here, innocence is seen as synonymous 
with ignorance. What you actually have behind such a belief is a fear 
of free will and of making choices. 
The more extensive your knowledge, the more aware you are of 
probable actions, and of the conglomeration of choices that then 
become available. There are also people, then, with an intense thirst 
for knowledge who believe that knowledge is indeed good and beneficial, while on the other hand they believe just as fervently that 
knowledge is forbidden and dangerous. 
YOU. YOU. YOU. AND YOU. LIVING AT CROSS PURPOSES 
• 241 • 
All of these instances lead, of course, to severe dilemmas, and 
often pull an individual in two directions at once. They are the 
cause, also, of many spiritual, emotional, and physical difficulties. 
It should probably be noted here also that this suspicion of 
knowledge is intensified when the female sex is involved, for the 
legends quite erroneously give the impression that knowledge 
is twice as disastrous if possessed by a woman. This should be kept 
in mind whenever we discuss beliefs that are specifically sexually 
oriented. 
It must seem obvious that behind all such beliefs lies the distrust 
of nature, man, and life itself. 
(4:28.) We must also remember, however, that in a fashion beliefs 
themselves are tools, and that in some situations beliefs that seem 
quite negative can also clear the way for more beneficial ones. With 
all of this discussion of negative beliefs, therefore, it is a good idea 
not to call any beliefs bad or evil in themselves. They are no more 
bad or evil in their way own, say, than viruses are in theirs. If you look 
upon them in that manner, you will avoid being overwhelmed by 
what seems to be an endless parade of negative thoughts and beliefs 
that can only lead to destruction. Instead, compare the negative 
beliefs, for example, with the storms that sweep the country: they 
have their purposes — and all in all those purposes tend to promote 
and support life itself. 
While we are still in the middle of such discussions, however, 
remind yourself that any situation can be changed for the better. 
Remind yourselves constantly that the most favorable solution to a 
problem is at least as probable as the most unfortunate "solution." 
Remind yourselves also that despite all of your worrying, the spirit 
of life itself is continually within your experience, and forms your 
physical body. 
(Longpause.) In this session, again I accelerate those coordinates 
that encourage well-being and peace of body and mind. Have 
Ruburt pay particular attention to the last several sentences. 
("Good afternoon, Seth." 
(4.38 P.M. Again, we had no interruptions during the session. Jane's 
delivery had been good. She had a cigarette ivhile I read her the session 
before turning her.) 
• 242 • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
JUNE 1,1984 
4:12 P.M. FRIDAY 
Now I bid you another most fond good afternoon — 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
— and we will resume dictation. 
(Long pause.) Large numbers of the population do indeed live 
unsatisfactory lives, with many individuals seeking goals that are 
nearly unattainable because of the conglomeration of conflicting 
beliefs that all vie for their attention. They are at cross purposes with 
themselves. 
This leads not only to private dilemmas, illnesses, and seemingly 
futile relationships — but also to national misunderstandings, 
entanglements, and world disorders. There are indeed ways of 
breaking through such conflicts, however, and those broader 
avenues of expression, peace, and satisfaction are available to each 
individual, however unfortunate the entire picture seems to be. 
It is possible, therefore, to improve your health, and to deepen 
the quality of all of your experience. 
In terms of earthly life as you understand it, it is overly optimistic 
to imagine that eventually all illnesses will be conquered, all relationships be inevitably fulfilling, or to foresee a future in which all 
people on earth are treated with equality and respect. For one thing, 
in that larger framework mentioned earlier in this book, illness itself 
is a part of life's overall activity. Disease states, so-called, are as necessary to physical life as normal health is, so we are not speaking of a 
nirvana on earth — but we aie saying that it is possible for each 
reader of this book to quicken his or her private perceptions, and to 
extend and expand the quality of ordinary consciousness enough so 
that by contrast to current experience, life could almost be thought 
of as "heaven on earth." 
(Longpause at 4:28.) This involves a reeducation of the most profound nature. All of the conflicting beliefs that have been mentioned thus far are the end result of what I have called before the 
"official line of consciousness." Certainly people experienced disease long before those conflicting beliefs began — but again, that is 
because of the part that disease states play in the overall health of 
individuals and of the world. 
YOU. YOU. YOU. AND YOU. LIVING AT CROSS PURPOSES 
• 243 • 
What we are going to have to do, then, is start over. It is indeed 
quite possible to do so, for you will be working with material with 
which you are intimately familiar: your own thoughts, emotions, and 
beliefs. 
You must start from your present position, of course, but there is 
no person who cannot better his or her position to a considerable 
degree, if the effort is made to follow through with the kind of 
new hypotheses that we will here suggest. These ideas are to some 
extent already present, though they have not predominated in world 
experience. 
Take a break, and we will briefly continue. 
(4:35. At break Linda brought in Jane's aspirin and Darvoset; my wife 
has still been uncomfortable while lying on her back. At the same time there 
was a great clangor outside: Three firetrucks and another vehicle, all with 
sirens, turned the corner just outside our third-story window, evidently 
heading toward the temporary entrance to the emergency room. Then a 
moment later there came a *Doctor Blue" emergency summons over the hospital's loudspeaker system. Resume at 4:44.) 
This alternate way of thinking is biologically pertinent, for it 
should be obvious now that certain beliefs and ideas serve to foster 
health and vitality, while others impede it. 
These ideas are translations of the emotional attitudes of all portions of nature and of life itself. They are better than any medicine, 
and they promote the expression of value fulfillment of all kinds of 
life, whatever its form. 
End of dictation. 
(4:47.) A note: This will be the last chapter of the first part of the 
book — which is to be called "Dilemmas." The beginning of the 
next chapter when we start it, will be the first chapter of the second 
part, to be called "Starting Over." 
I want to remind you both that what I am saying is indeed possible, and more possible than not. Period. 
Ruburt can start at his present position, as each person must 
begin with the situation at hand. The point of power is in the present. 
Now I bid you a most fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth. Thank you." 4:50 P.M.) 
PART TWO 
STARTING 
OVER 
T H E W A Y T O W A R D 
H E A L T H 
A PHOTO GALLERY 
iSH 
When my father, Robert Sr., 
photographed Jane and me 
on our wedding day, December 27, 1954, and then in 
1957, did any of us know that 
his work would be published 
almost half a century later? 
Yes, I think that in our separate ways each one of us 
chose to create this probable 
reality out of the many available. 
Within Seth's concept of simultaneous time, the treasured images 
in this gallery are fine examples of how the "past" lives in the 
"present" and in the "future." 
Jane's parents divorced when she was 3, ancl she ancl her angry, 
bedridden mother lived on welfare. Jane also spent a year in an 
orphanage when her mother was hospitalized. 
Jane's father, Del, photographed her in 1951, when she was 22. 
I met her three years later. 
With much humor, Jane as 
Seth made a point during a 
session in 1969. She was 40 
years old. Photo by Rich 
Conz. 
My friend, Laurel Lee Davies, photographed 
me in 1986, two years after Jane's death. 
My parents, Robert 
Sr. and Estelle, sup 
ported the choices 
their three children 
made — and so they 
wholeheartedly welcomed Jane into the 
family. She in turn 
came to love them 
deeply. They died in 
the early 1970s. 
Jane felt psychically connected 
to her "Little Daddy" — Joseph 
Burdo, her maternal grandfather. She was 20 when he 
died in 1949, at 68. 
Delmer and Marie Roberts married in 
March 1928. The were each 23. Jane was 
born on May 8,1929. 
Jane liked this trance 
shot: In a quiet moment 
during a hilarious session in 1969, Seth contemplates Rich Conz, a 
photographer for the 
Elmira Star-Gazette. Rich 
had many questions. 
Over the years I helped 
Jane while marvelling at 
her great creativity and 
trying to understand its 
source. Why was she doing the sessions? They 
were her way of contributing to understanding 
ourselves, and to peer 
into the great mystery of 
All That Is. 
Robert F. Butts (1919 -): Jane Roberts. 1987. Oil on panel, 13 x 17 in. 
The same year I painted my self-portrait, I painted Jane as I saw her 
in my dream of March 10, 1987. She had died in 1984.1 knew that in 
the dream Jane was reassuring me that she still lived. 
Robert F. Butts (1919 -): Self-portrait. 1987. Oil on panel, 16 x 14 in. 
I painted myself when I was 68 years old. It's quite a psychic, 
psychological, and physical education to stare at oneself in a mirror 
over a period of three months! 
Robert F. Butts (1919-): 
Seth 1968. Oil on panel, 
27 x 21 in. 
I painted Seth, that ageless 
"energy personality essence," 
from a vision I hacl of him 
five years after Jane began 
speaking for him in 1963. 
Their very creative relationship lasted for 21 years. 
36x26 in. 
Oil on panel, 24 x 30 in. 
In 1965, at the age of 36, Jane had posed for the two conventional 
portraits shown here. 
CHAPTER 10 
A NEW BEGINNING. INSTRUCTIONS, SUGGESTIONS, 
AND RESOLUTIONS — AND WHEN TO IGNORE THESE 
JUNE 3,1984 
3:11 P.M. SUNDAY 
/ 
A nurse and an aide met me at the door to 330 this noon and told me 
\ i l 
that they'd spent half an hour trying to get Jane comfortable. She 
was on her back when I arrived. She's still on Darvoset and aspirin, and 
the two drugs are beginning to affect her hearing. I've noticed for the last 
week or so that she's getting hard of hearing again — I have to speak 
louder, turn up the TV, and so forth. 
(Jane ate well, however, and reread the last four sessions afterward, 
while I did some mail. I told her that Frank Longwell visited this morning. 
We agreed on the location of the Crimson King red maple in the back yard; 
Frank is to plant it tomorrow afternoon, and bring the young fellow with 
him to mow the grass, which is some six inches high. It rained again last 
night and this morning.) 
Now I bid you another fine good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
First of all, a note to Ruburt: tell him not to put off free association in regard to his fear about his body's performance, but to discuss this as openly as possible with you. 
• 247 • 
• 2 4 8 TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
This does also allow you to give him some comfort, and help alleviate any feelings you have of not being able to help enough. The feelings should be aired, however — and then not concentrated upon. 
We will begin now with Part Two of the book: "Starting Over." 
The next chapter to be called: "A New Beginning. Instructions, Suggestions, and Resolutions — and When to Ignore These." 
The thoughts and beliefs that we want to rearouse are those that 
were often predominant in childhood, as mentioned earlier in this 
book. They are spiritual, mental, emotional and biological beliefs 
that are innately present in the birth of each creature. Children 
believe not only that there will be a tomorrow, and many tomorrows, 
but they also believe that each tomorrow will be rewarding and filled 
with discovery. 
They feel themselves couched in an overall feeling of security 
and safety, even in the face of an unpleasant environment or situation. They feel drawn to other people and to other creatures, and 
left alone they trust their contacts with others. They have an inbred 
sense of self-satisfaction and self-appreciation, and they instinctively 
feel that it is natural and good for them to explore and develop their 
capabilities. 
Take a break. 
(3:23. Jane called for a break because I'd been coughing and sniffling, 
trying to sneeze. I told her Fd felt something in my throat. I didn't know 
what had set me off really, though.) 
They expect relationships to be rewarding and continuing, and 
expect each event will have the best possible results. They enjoy communication, the pursuit of knowledge, and they are filled with curiosity. 
All of those attitudes provide the strength and mental health that 
promotes their physical growth and development. However simple 
those ideas may sound to the adult, still they carry within them the 
needed power and impetus that fill all of life's parts. Later, conflicting beliefs often smother such earlier attitudes, so that by the time 
children have grown into adults they actually hold almost an opposite set of hypotheses. These take it for granted that any stressful situation will worsen, that communication with others is dangerous, 
that self-fulfillment brings about the envy and vengeance of others, 
and that as individuals they live in an unsafe society, set down in the 
A NEW BEGINNING 
• 249 • 
middle of a natural world that is itself savage, cruel, and caring only 
for its own survival at any cost. 
Take a break, and we will continue. 
(3:33. Robert came in to take Jane's blood pressure. The day was cold 
and cloudy. Resume at 3:42.) 
Your body actually lives on large quantities of joyful expectation. 
The fetus is propelled by the expectation of future growth and 
development. It is bad enough to anticipate that most unfortunate 
situations will worsen rather than improve, but it is foolhardy indeed 
to believe that mankind is bound to destroy itself, or that nuclear 
destruction is nearly inevitable. 
Many people no longer believe in life after death, and so large 
numbers of the population are philosophically denied a spiritual or 
a physical future. 
This deprives body and mind of the zest and purpose needed in 
order to enjoy any pursuits or activities. Such beliefs make any 
human endeavor appear futile. There are ways of reacting to the 
dangers of nuclear energy that are far more healthy and beneficial, 
and we will discuss these later in the book. 
For now, I simply want to suggest that all such beliefs should be 
understood and dismissed as soon as possible. We hope to show how 
most natural health-promoting beliefs can be applied to all mental, 
physical, or emotional illnesses or difficulties. I want to assure you 
that regardless of your circumstances, age, or sex, you can indeed 
start over, rearousing from within yourself those earlier, more innocent expectations, feelings and beliefs. It is much better if you can 
imagine this endeavor more in the light of children's play, in fact, 
rather than think of it as a deadly serious adult pursuit. 
In other words, we will try to instill a somewhat playful attitude, 
even toward the most severe problems, for the very idea of play 
encourages the use of the imagination and the creative abilities. 
This starting over — 
(3:56. Leanne came in with the mixture of aspirin and Darvoset that 
Jane's been taking lately. It left a bitter taste. I read the session to her, and 
once again had to speak louder for her to hear me. Resume at 4:10.) 
Again, because of the simultaneous nature of time, beliefs can be 
changed in the present moment. 
• 250 • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
There is no need to search endlessly into the past of this life or 
any other, for the "original" causes for beliefs. Making a change in 
the present of a certain kind will automatically alter all beliefs 
"across the board," so to speak. It is important, however, that you do 
not strain too hard to achieve results, but allow yourself some leeway. 
You react to your beliefs habitually, often unthinkingly, and in usual 
ideas of time, and in your experience of it — you must allow yourself 
"some time" to change that habitual behavior. 
As you do, you will discover yourself reacting to the desired 
beliefs as easily and automatically as you did to the undesirable ones. 
As you do, keep the idea of child's play in mind, however. This will 
allow you to keep the entire affair in a kind of suspension. 
The child plays at being an adult long before he is one, and so 
you can play with more desirable beliefs while you are still growing 
into that more beneficial picture. 
End of dictation. 
Again, I accelerate those coordinates that lead to peace of mind 
and body, and promote the healing processes. And I bid you a most 
fond early evening. 
("Good afternoon, Seth." 4:19 P.M.) 
JUNE 4,1984 
3:19 P.M. MONDAY 
Now I bid you another most fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
We will resume dictation. 
One of the issues I want to discuss in depth is that of spontaneity 
in relationship to health and disease. 
Your very physical existence itself is dependent upon the smooth 
functioning of many spontaneous processes. Your thinking, breathing, and motion are all guided by activities that are largely unconscious — at least from the standpoint of what you usually think of as 
the conscious mind. 
Your body repairs itself constandy, and your mind thinks — all 
without your normally conscious attention. The same applies to all 
of those inner processes that make life possible. Your thoughts are 
conscious, but the process of thinking itself is not. Spontaneity is parA NEW BEGINNING 
• 251 • 
ticularly important in the actions of children, and in the natural 
rhythmic motion of their limbs. Feelings also seem to come and go 
in a spontaneous fashion. 
It is indeed as if some inner spontaneous part of the personality 
is far more knowledgeable than the conscious portion of which we 
are so rightfully proud. 
Many people, however, fear spontaneity: it evokes extravagance, 
excesses, and dangerous freedoms. Even people who are not so fervendy opposed to spontaneity often feel that it is somehow suspect, distasteful, perhaps leading to humiliating actions. Spontaneity, however, 
represents the spirit of life itself, and it is the basis for the will to live, 
and for those impulses that stimulate action, motion, and discovery. 
In the truest regard, your life is provided for you by these spontaneous processes. As I've mentioned in past books, at one time the 
human personality was "more at one with itself." It accommodated 
unconscious and conscious experience more equitably. Man was 
more aware of his dreams and so-called unconscious activity. 
It is only because civilized man has somewhat overspecialized in 
the use of one kind of knowledge over another that people fear the 
unconscious, spontaneous portions of the self. The fear alone causes 
them to block out still more and more unconscious knowledge. 
Since the spontaneous portions are so related to bodily activity, they 
are very important in facilitating good health, and when people feel 
divorced from their spontaneous selves, they also feel divorced to 
the same extent from their own bodies. 
(3:43.) Such individuals become frightened of freedom itself, of 
choices and of changes. They try desperately to control themselves 
and their environment against what seems to be a raging, spontaneous mass of primitive impulses from within, and against a mindless, chaotic, ancient force of nature. In the physical world, such 
behavior often leads to compulsive action — stereotyped mental 
and physical motion and other situations with a strong repressive 
coloration. Here any expression becomes almost taboo. The conscious mind must be in control of all actions as much as possible, for 
such a person feels that only rigid, logical thought is strong enough 
to hold back such strong impulsive force. 
(Long pause.) These attitudes may be reflected in rather simple 
compulsive actions: the woman who cleans the house endlessly, whether 
• 2 5 2 TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
it needs it or not; the man who will follow certain precise, defined 
routes of activity — driving down certain streets only to work; washing his hands much more frequendy than other people; the person 
who constandy buttons and unbuttons a sweater or vest. Many such 
simple actions show a stereotyped kind of behavior that results from 
a desperate need to gain control over oneself and the environment. 
Take your break. 
(3:52. Jane had coffee and a smoke. It was getting cloudy; I told her I 
hoped Frank Longwell was at the house, planting the red maple while the 
young fellow from school was mowing the grass. Resume at 4:00.) 
Any excessive behavior may enter in, including oversmoking, 
overeating, and overdrinking. 
It will be difficult for some people to believe that spontaneity is 
to be trusted, for they may be only aware of feeling destructive or violent impulses. The idea of expressing impulses spontaneously will be 
most frightening under those conditions. 
Actually the people involved are repressing not violent impulses 
but natural loving ones. They are afraid that expressions of love, or 
the need for dependence will only bring them scorn or punishment. 
Therefore, they hide those yearnings, and the destructive impulses 
actually serve to protect them from the expression of love that they 
have somehow learned to fear. 
Science itself, for all of its preciseness in some areas, often 
equates instinctive, impulsive — 
(4:06. Leanne came in to give Jane medications. She told us she's leaving the hospital to be a supervisor in Painted Post, a small community some 
17 miles west ofElmira. We wished her well. I read the last sentence to Jane 
at 4:14.) 
— chaotic, destructive activity as one and the same. 
Nature and the inner nature of man are both seen to contain 
savage, destructive forces against which civilization and the reasoning mind must firmly stand guard. 
Science itself often displays compulsive and ritualistic behavior, 
to the point of programming its own paths of reasoning, so that they 
cover safe ground, and steadfasdy ignore the great inner forces of 
spontaneity that make science — or any discipline — possible. As I 
have said before, spontaneity knows its own order. Nothing is more 
A NEW BEGINNING 
• 253 • 
highly organized than the physical body that spontaneously grows all 
of its own parts. 
(All intently:) As your life is provided for you, so to speak, by these 
spontaneous processes, the life of the universe is provided in the 
same fashion. You see the physical stars, and your instruments probe 
the distances of space — but the inner processes that make the universe possible are those same processes that propel your own thinking. It is erroneous, therefore, to believe that spontaneity and 
discipline are mere opposites. Instead, true discipline is the result of 
true spontaneity. 
(4:24.) Value fulfillment of each and every element in life relies 
upon those spontaneous processes, and at their source is the basic 
affirmative love and acceptance of the self, the universe, and life's 
conditions. 
End of dictation. 
Again I activate those coordinates that quicken your own peace of 
mind and self-healing processes — which are, remember, spontaneous. 
("Thank you." 
(4:26 P.M. Jane had done well, I told her. She'd had a slightly better 
day, and ate well. As I drove tip the road to the hill house, I held my 
breath — then saw that the grass hacl indeed been cut; it looked great. As I 
pulled into the driveway in back, I saw that Frank had planted the red 
maple. Not only that, he'd brought his tiller back, and had once again 
plowed up the back yard, preparatory to sowing the wildjlower seeds.) 
JUNE 5,1984 
3:05 P.M. TUESDAY 
Now I bid you another most fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
We will resume dictation. 
(Longpause.) Since ancient times religion has tried to help man 
understand the nature of his own subjective reality — but religion 
has its own dark side, and for this reason religion unfortunately has 
fostered fear of the spontaneous. 
Instead of promoting the idea of man's inner worth, it has taught 
people to distrust the inner self and its manifestations. Most churches 
• 2 5 4 TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
preach a dogma that stresses concepts of the sinful self, and sees man 
as a creature contaminated by original sin even before birth. 
This distorted picture depicts a species of sinners innately driven 
by evil, sometimes demonic, forces. In this dogma man needs to 
apologize for his birth, and the conditions of life are seen as a punishment set by God upon his erring creatures. Unfortunately such 
concepts are also reflected in fields of psychology, particularly in 
Freudianism — where, say, slips of the tongue may betray the self's 
hidden, nefarious true desires. 
The unconscious is understood to be a garbage heap of undesirable impulses, long ago discarded by civilization, while again much 
religious theory projects the image of the hidden self that must be 
kept in bounds by good work, prayer, and penance. 
Amid such a conglomeration of negative suppositions, the idea 
of a good and innocent inner self seems almost scandalous. To 
encourage expression of that self appears foolhardy, for it seems 
only too clear that if the lid of consciousness were opened, so to 
speak, all kinds of inner demons and enraged impulses would rush 
forth. 
(Longpause at 3:20.) Again, people who have such views of the inner 
self usually project the same ideas upon natare at large, so that the 
natural world appears equally mysterious, dangerous, and threatening. 
In political terms such persons also look for strong authoritative 
groups or governments, stress law and order above justice or equality, and tend to see the poorer, less advantaged members of society as 
impulse-ridden, dangerous, and always ready for revolution. It is 
quite frequent for persons with those beliefs to discipline their 
bodies overmuch, take positions as police guards, or set themselves 
up in one way or another in control of their fellows. 
I am not here stating that all police guards, members of the military or whatever, fall into that category. Such people will, however, 
tend toward a strongly disciplined life. Many of their health problems will deal with eruptions — interior ulcers, skin eruptions, or in 
very definite mental and emotional eruptions, and great outbursts of 
force and temper all the more noticeable because of the usual disciplined patterns of behavior. 
Take your break. 
(Resume at 3:50.) 
A NEW BEGINNING 
• 255 • 
In most such cases there is a lack of the normal range of emotional expression. Such persons often find it extremely difficult to 
express love, joy, or gratitude, for example, and this lack of expression is taken for granted by others, who do not see it in its true light, 
but think instead that the person is simply reticent. 
Secondary personalities and schizophrenic episodes are also 
somewhat characteristic — again appearing as sudden explosive 
behavior when conflicting beliefs are damned up and held back. 
And when it is believed that the inner self is indeed a bed of chaotic 
impulses, then it becomes less and less possible for an individual to 
express normal ranges of activity. The person then feels lethargic 
and out of touch with work or family. 
Expression is a necessity of life, however. Each person feels that 
drive. When one set of rigid beliefs threatens to make action appear 
meaningless, then another set of buried, repressed beliefs may surface, providing new impetus precisely when it is needed — but also 
forming a secondary personality with characteristics almost opposite 
to those of the primary self. 
We will have more to say on all of these issues — but now I want to 
discuss spontaneity, or its lack, in relationship to sexuality and health. 
All of the negative beliefs just mentioned touch upon sexuality in 
one way or another. Those with the beliefs just mentioned often 
think of sexuality as bestial, evil, and even humiliating. 
These attitudes are intensified where the female sex is concerned. You have, of course, a strong drive toward sexuality, and if 
you believe that it is to be shunned at the same time, then you are in 
a very ambiguous position. Women with such beliefs and conflicts 
often wind up having hysterectomies, performed incidentally by 
male doctors, who hold the very same beliefs. 
Many men look forward to having sons, while at the same time they 
revere marriage as a necessary part of respectable family life, and also 
feel that marriage is somehow degrading — particularly to a male — 
and that the sex act itself is only justified if it brings him an heir. 
Such a male will seek sex with prostitutes, or with women he considers beneath him. In a strange fashion, he may even feel that it 
is wrong to have sex with his own wife, believing that the sex act 
so degrades the both of them. In many cases these people will be 
great sportsmen, follow conventionalized male pursuits, and perhaps 
• 256 • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
express contempt for the arts or any interest considered remotely 
feminine. 
End of dictation. 
(4:33.) Once again I quicken those coordinates that energize 
your own peace of body and mind, and facilitate the use of your own 
intuitive abilities. 
I bid you a fond early evening. 
("Thank you." 
(4:34 P.M.Jane's rather slow delivery had been interrupted three times 
by staff. I told her that the session was very good, as all of them have been 
in this recent series. She was pleased. 
(The day was hot — over 80 degrees — and fell something like 
summer for the first time. Jane had felt better today. She ate well for lunch 
and supper, and turned easily. She is still on the Darvoset-aspirin regime, 
plus the calcium and the other extra vitamins — we don't knoiv what they 
are. Peggy Gallagher visited at about 6:40, so I got ready and left for the 
evening without Jane and I reading the prayer.) 
JUNE 6,1984 
4:09 P.M. WEDNESDAY 
(I brought Jane a chicken sandwich — the third in a series, and the 
last one made from the barbecued chicken I'd bought at a Convenient 
Market. She enjoyed it again. She's still uncomfortable, but felt a little belter 
today. I told her that I'd be leaving early to go to the dentist. I'd broken a 
tooth last night, and feared I'd lose it. 
(I suggested to Jane that she could have a session before I left. She didn't 
feel any thing at first, and I did some mail while I wailed. Finally she said 
she felt Seth around. Her delivery was a bit on the sloio side, but steady.) 
Now I bid you another most fond good afternoon — 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
— and we will resume dictation. 
Many schools of religion and so-called esoteric knowledge have 
promoted the idea that sexuality and spirituality were diametrically 
opposed to each other. 
People in the sports arena also often encourage the concept that 
sexual expression is somehow debilitating to the male, and can 
weaken his constitution. Priests take vows to ensure sexual abstinence. 
A NEW BEGINNING 
• 257 • 
The fact is that sexual expression is, again, an important element in 
the entire range of human experience, encouraging mental and 
physical health and vitality. 
Some people may have a stronger or weaker sex drive than 
others, and yet that drive is a strong part of any individual's natural 
rhythm. Damned up, such sexuality still keeps trying for expression, 
and it is often men of habitual "sexual discipline" who suddenly 
break out in bouts of sexual promiscuity or violence. 
In actuality, the combination of a philosophical stress upon discipline, physical and mental, with the belief in the sinful self, often 
brings about the most unfortunate human dilemmas. These ideas 
usually ride along with feelings that power is desirable but dangerous. To abstain from sexuality then means to store up one's own 
power. People with such beliefs often have severe problems with constipation, and have retention symptoms — retaining water, for 
example, or salt or whatever. 
(4:21.) They may also suffer with stomach difficulties, many 
being overly fond of extremely spicy foods. Some have unusually 
heavy appetites, even though these may be regulated by a series of 
diets — which are then broken by overeating. 
There are so many other elements involved in human nature 
that I do not really want to point out any culprits, yet male-segregated communities are obviously notorious for encouraging that 
kind of behavior. Every individual in such institutions or societies is 
not affected in the same fashion, of course — yet you do have these 
kinds of closed societies, relatively speaking, and they can indeed 
serve as cradles for fanaticism and rigid stereotypes of behavior. 
Again, here you find that discipline, rather than free will, is stressed, 
so that the opportunity for choices is drastically reduced. The more 
open a society, the more healthy its people. 
End of session. 
("Thank you." 4:30 P.M.) 
JUNE 7,1984 
3:21 P.M. THURSDAY 
(The day was very warm — over 90 degrees — when I left for 330 
this noon. Jane was better today, and 330 wasn't bad at all, with the air 
• 2 5 8 TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
conditioner going, the fan on, and the windows wide open. Fd brought 
shorts with me and changed into them; I already had sandals there. The 
weather had a luxurious, lush feel, as though our globe had finally turned 
from an adversary into a nurturing, supportive parent. I worked on mail 
after helping Jane eat lunch, until she said she was ready for a session. I 
told my wife that I had indeed lost the tooth.) 
Now I bid you another most fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
We will resume dictation. 
What I have said also applies to organizations segregated along 
feminine lines, though to a lesser degree. 
In both cases the sexes are denied any true communication, and 
an extremely artificial framework is maintained, in which the sexes 
literally become strangers to each other. This also encourages various kinds of hysterical reactions, as well as a larger frequency of "contagious diseases" than is experienced by the normal population. 
These conditions also occur in some varieties of religious cults, 
whether or not strict sexual segregation is enforced. If human relationships are highly regulated and supervised, or family members 
encouraged to spy upon their relatives or friends, then you have the 
same kind of curtailment of natural expression and communication. 
People in such societies often suffer from malnourishment, frequent beatings, an excessive use of the enema, and often indulge in 
physical punishment. The children are strictly raised, and a lack of 
normal spontaneity is the rule rather than the exception. Members 
of such organizations often suffer maladies in which their bodies do 
not utilize nutrients. They are often food faddists of one kind or 
another, but because they do fear spontaneity to such a degree they 
will often become afflicted with diseases or maladies associated with 
the body's unconscious processes. 
(Long pause at 3:34.) You can also find single families, of course, 
that operate like cults — or an entire nation — that are given over 
to repression with its resulting violence. 
The ideas that you have, then, play a large role in the way the 
body handles its nutrients, and utilizes its health and vitality. If you 
believe that the body is somehow evil, you may punish it by nearly 
starving to death, even though your diet might be considered 
normal by usual standards. For it is possible for your ideas to cause 
A NEW BEGINNING 
• 259 • 
chemical reactions that impede your body's ability to accept nourishment. If you believe that the body is evil, the purest health-food 
diet will or may do you litde good at all, while if you have a healthy 
desire and respect for your physical body, a diet of TV dinners, and 
even of fast foods, may well keep you healthy and nourished. 
If we are talking about health, it is to your beliefs that we must 
look. You have the most efficient and beautiful physical organs, the 
most elegant joints and appendages, the most vibrant lungs and the 
most exquisite of senses. It is up to you to form a body of beliefs that 
is worthy of your physical image — for you are nourished by your 
beliefs, and those beliefs can cause your daily bread to add to your 
vitality, or to add to your cares and stress. 
Take a break. 
(3:45. Leanne came in to check Jane's vitals — they were all normal — 
and to give her Darvoset. A new aide asked for tomorrow's menu, which I'd 
left on the medicine tray in the hall, as usual. Resume at 4:04.) 
The weight of unfortunate beliefs perhaps falls heaviest on the 
older segments of the population, for the beliefs have had a longer 
period of time to operate relatively unimpeded. 
Those particular beliefs actually take hold in young adults, so 
that it seems that all of life is meant to come to its fullest flower in 
young adulthood, and then from that prestigious position fall 
quicker and quicker into disuse and disarray. 
These ideas do not only inflict severe difficulties upon older 
members of the population, but they also have a vital part to play in 
the behavior of many young people who commit suicide direcdy or 
indirecdy. It seems to such youngsters that the pinnacle of life is just 
at hand, to last only briefly, and then to be snatched away. Undue 
stress is laid upon youthful beauty and youthful achievement, so that 
it appears that all of the rest of life's activities must suffer by contrast. 
Knowledge through experience is not considered a practicalenough method of learning, so that the skills and understanding 
that come with age are seldom taken into consideration. 
Again, to a certain degree, religion and science — and the medical sciences in particular — seem devoted to encouraging the most 
negative beliefs about human nature. It is taken for granted that all 
mental, physical, spiritual and emotional satisfactions become lesser 
with advancing age. It is taken for granted that memory fails, the 
• 260 • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
body weakens, the senses stagnate, and emotional vividness dims. It 
is often considered scandalous to even imagine sexual activity after 
the age of even 40 or 50. 
Faced with that kind of a projected future, no wonder many adolescents prefer to die before catching sight of the very first hint of 
deterioration — the first wrinkle or touch of gray in the hair. What 
forerunners of disaster such natural signs must seem (exclamation 
point)! And at the other end of the scale, older parents are treated 
by their grown children as if they themselves were falling into a 
grotesque version of a second childhood. Many people actually speak 
louder to older persons, whether or not they have any hearing difficulties at all. 
Your entire world of commerce and advertisements, of competition and of business, prolong such attitudes. This is aside from the 
impact of the entertainment industry, which reflects that same glorification of youth, and that fear of growing old. 
There are very definite, excellent side-effects of growing older, 
that we will also discuss in this book — but here I want to assure the 
reader that basically speaking there are no diseases brought about by 
old age alone (intently). 
The body often wears out because it has been used less and less — 
and that is because litde study has been given to the true capabilities 
of the healthy physical body in the later years of life. That period also 
contains certain rhythms in which normal healing processes are highly 
accelerated, and the life force itself does not wear out or lessen within 
a body. Its expression may be impeded at any time, but the unique 
energy of each individual is not drained away because of age alone. 
We will have more to say concerning older people and their ways 
of life, and also discuss the many beliefs and ideas that can come 
almost immediately to their aid. The subject of suicide will also be 
discussed in a different context, and when I invite my readers to start 
over, I want it understood that you can indeed start over regardless 
of your age or circumstances. 
End of dictation. 
Again I accelerate those coordinates that encourage your own 
peace of body and mind, and accelerate your own healing processes. 
("Thank you." 
(4:35. P.M. It was getting late, and I didn't read the session to Jane.) 
CHAPTER 11 
STARTING OVER FROM THE BOTTOM UPWARD. 
THE WILL TO LIVE 
JUNE 8,1984 
3:14 P.M. FRIDAY 
he day was once again very hot — at least 90 degrees — but room 
330 was pleasant once more. There was a good breeze, which was 
quite noticeable up on the third floor. Jane and I read the prayer together 
after lunch. I did a little mail until she said she was ready for the session. 
She seemed to feel a bit better than she has been lately. Her delivery was on 
the slow side, but steady.) 
Now I bid you another most fond good afternoon — 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
— and we will continue dictation. 
Starting over — changing one's beliefs, is a bold endeavor. It is 
quite possible that along the way you may become discouraged or 
disillusioned. 
At such times it is a good idea to give yourself time to relax. Turn 
your attention to something else entirely, and mentally say, "To hell 
with it all for now." The entire idea involves a process in which you 
try and not try at the same time, in which you do not strain to achieve 
results, but instead gendy begin to allow yourself to follow the contours of your own subjective feelings, to uncover those spiritual and 
• 261 • 
• 262TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
biologically valid beliefs of early childhood, and to bring to them the 
very best wisdom that you have acquired throughout your life so far. 
So when you do become discouraged, a playful diversion should 
give you refreshing release. An escapist movie or novel, or the purchase of some small frivolous item may also serve to relax your conscious mind. We are actually involved in changing a way of life, in 
altering our very view of the self and the world in the hopes of 
acquiring a new sense of harmony with our bodies, our minds, our 
fellow creatures, and the environment. 
Indeed, there is no more exciting adventure, and it will bring 
about more surprises and discoveries than any expedition to alien 
landscapes. Your beliefs are indeed alive in their own fashion. Now, 
instead of taking them for granted, you will begin to notice both 
their uniqueness and their variety. 
(3:28.) If we are talking about starting over, however, we may as 
well begin at one of the lowest points and work upward. This way you 
can see beliefs in their darkest form, and then little by little watch 
them begin to show energy, vitality, and fresh impetus. 
End of chapter. 
The next chapter is to be entitled "Starting Over From the Bottom 
Upward. The Will to Live." 
In nearly all matters of poor health, or unfortunate living conditions or mental or physical stress, there exists a strong tinge of 
denial, fear, and repression. 
These are seen at their most severe and their most obvious where 
suicide is involved — particularly in the suicide of the young. Later 
we will discuss some special cases of reincarnational influence connected with suicide, but for now we will be concerned with the 
increasing numbers of suicides by young adults. 
At one time or another most people consider the possibility of 
their own death. That is a quite natural reaction to the conditions of 
life. With some people, however, the idea of death seems to grow 
obsessive, so that it is felt to be the one escape from life's problems. 
It may even achieve an allure in some people's minds. 
The propelling force in all of existence is the desire to be. however — the impetus toward expression, development, and fulfillment. 
Some people who consider suicide believe in life after death, and 
STARTING OVER FROM THE BOTTOM UPWARD 
• 263 • 
some do not — and in the deepest of terms all deaths are somewhat 
suicidal. Physical life must end if it is to survive. There are certain 
conditions, however, that promote suicidal activity, and the termination of one's own life has been held in great disrepute by many religions and societies, though not in all. 
Individuals innately want to cooperate with their fellow human 
beings. They have a need to help other people, and to contribute to 
the common good. Many people who commit suicide feel to the contrary that they are no longer needed, or in fact that their very existence stands in the way of other people's happiness. Young adult 
suicides are not necessarily from the poorest or the lowest stratas of 
society at all. In fact, poverty often serves as a strong impetus, leading 
the individual to fight for his or her daily needs. 
Such a person's days may be so crowded with desperate activity 
that there is no time with which to even contemplate suicide, 
because the struggle for life itself is so intent. 
Again, the desire for value fulfillment, development and purpose is so strong that if those seem denied, life becomes — or seems 
to become — less precious. In many cases it is the son and daughter 
of the upper middle-classes, or the well-to-do, who run into such lifeendangering dilemmas. Some youngsters are so overly provided for 
by their families that it seems that there is no way for them to achieve 
any more than they have. 
(Long pause at 4:00. Jane had been interrupted once during her delivery.) If their parents are overly indulgent, then the youngsters may 
actually feel as if they were adjuncts to their parents, or possessions 
alone. On the other hand, some upper-middle-class families stress 
competition to such a degree that it seems to the children that they 
are only valued for their achievements, rather than being loved for 
simply being the people they are. 
To most people, none of these situations seem particularly drastic, and certainly there are far worse cases of human disillusionment 
in the world. Yet many siich youngsters literally see no future for 
themselves as adults. 
They do not visualize themselves as future parents, or as having 
certain careers. It is as if their whole lives accelerated to the brink of 
adulthood — yet they could see nothing beyond. Along the way, 
• 264TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
whether or not it was obvious to parents, such youngsters begin to 
feel that life is meaningless. Often such individuals are highly gifted, 
yet they feel as if that promise will never blossom. 
In most cases these youngsters are actually quite secretive — 
though the self they show to parents and friends might appear to be 
lively and gregarious. 
Take your break and we will continue. 
(4:11.1 read the session so far to Jane, but it wasn yt easy: because of the 
lost tooth I had trouble enunciating clearly. Resume at 4:34.) 
Such persons £aji help themselves, however, and they can be 
helped by others. 
First of all, let me make it clear that no one is "damned" for 
committing suicide. There are no particular "penalties." 
Would-be suicides, for all their secrecy, usually do mention the 
subject to a friend, relative,, or close family member. The subject 
should not be ignored or condemned, but honestly examined. Part of 
the mystique of the suicidal impulse is indeed the secretive aspect — 
so the very expression of the feeling is beneficial, and leads to better 
communication. 
Indeed, part of the would-be suicide's dilemma may be caused by 
a lack of communication with others, a misinterpretation of the 
motives of friends or family members, and a difficulty in expressing 
one's own needs and wishes. 
End of dictation. 
Once again I accelerate those coordinates that activate your own 
peace of body and mind, and accelerate all of your bodily processes. 
A most fond early evening. 
("Thank you, Seth." 4:42 P.M.) 
JUNE 9,1984 
3:38 P.M. SATURDAY 
Now I bid you another most fond good afternoon — 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
— and we will continue dictation. 
(Long pause.) If you are a person who contemplates suicide 
often, you should indeed talk to a confidante about your problem. 
STARTING OVER FROM THE BOTTOM UPWARD 
• 265 • 
This communication on your part will help clear the air to some 
extent. Such a person is considering an irreversible step — one certainly that should not be taken lighdy. Often such people are in a 
very depressed state of mind, so that they have already closed their 
thoughts to the reasons for living, and only keep reminding themselves of the availability of death. 
Often other people can make some small, seemingly innocuous 
comment that suddenly opens the disturbed person's mind to new possibilities. Because the entire mental, physical, emotional, and spiritual 
portions of the self are always stimulated to seek further growth and 
development and satisfaction, then it is quite possible for the mind 
to seize upon even the smallest event that will spontaneously release 
the person at least momentarily from depression, or even despair. 
If you are in such a situation, do remind yourself that it is far 
more natural and probable for any problem to be solved, and that 
every problem has a solution. Death is not a solution. It is an end in 
a very basic manner. 
No matter how depressed you may feel, you do still want to live, 
or you would be dead by now — so there is a part of you that seeks 
life and vitality, and that portion also deserves expression. It is a 
good idea to put off making any decision for a while. After all, if you 
do choose suicide, you can always kill yourself. If you commit suicide, 
however, your choices for this life are over. 
Tell yourself you will make no decision until after your birthday, 
or after the holidays, or that you will put off any decision for a 
month, or even a week — whatever you feel most comfortable with. 
Any therapist can also follow through by making such suggestions, thus gaining the client's cooperation at the same time by letting the individual choose the time period for which such a decision 
will be delayed. 
(3:54.) It is futile to tell such a person that he or she can not, or 
must not, commit suicide — and indeed, such a procedure can be 
quite dangerous, hardening the person's leaning toward a death 
decision. The idea of making choices should be stressed: to live or to 
die is indeed each person's choice. 
Some people might say, UI have a right to die," when they are 
arguing the case for suicide. And while this is true, it is also true that 
• 2 6 6 TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
the people on your planet need every bit of help and encouragement they can get from each person alive. In a certain sense, the 
energy of each individual does keep the world going, and to commit 
suicide is to refuse a basic, cooperative venture. 
It is also true that persons in ordinary good health who often 
contemplate suicide have already closed themselves away from the 
world to an important extent. Even their physical senses seem 
blurred, until often they seek further and further stimulation. These 
same attitudes are apparent in a lesser degree to varying extents in 
periods of mental or bodily illness or in unsatisfactory life situations. 
If you are such a person, however, there are also other steps that you 
can take. Project yourself into a satisfying future. Remind yourself 
that the future is indeed there if you want it, and that you can grow 
into that future as easily as you grew from the past into the present. 
Many depressives concentrate almost devotedly upon the miseries 
of the world — the probable disasters that could bring about its end. 
They remind themselves that the planet is overpopulated, and project into the future the most dire of disasters, man-made and natural. 
Such thoughts are bound to cause depression. They are also 
painting a highly prejudiced view of reality, leaving out all matters 
concerning man's heroism, love of his fellow creatures, his wonder, 
sympathy, and the great redeeming qualities of the natural world 
itself. So such people must change their focus of attention. 
The other creative, positive, achieving portions of life are ever 
present, and thoughts of them alone can bring refreshment and 
release from tension. 
Take a break. 
(4:11. Jane had a smoke. The day was hot and gorgeous. A good breeze 
moved outside the windows of 330, making the new green leaves of the 
mountain ash tree dance. Resume at 4:23.) 
The point is that all of the world's problems also represent great 
challenges. Young people in particular are needed to work for the 
promotion of peace and nuclear disarmament, to take up the tasks 
of deregulating and redistributing food sources, and of encouraging 
nations to join in such a creative venture. Those are indeed worthy 
and stirring causes, as noble as any that faced any generation in the 
past. The world needs every hand and eye, and cries out for expression of love and caring. To devote oneself to such a cause is far more 
STARTING OVER FROM THE BOTTOM UPWARD 
• 267 • 
praiseworthy than to steadily bemoan global problems with a sorrowful eye and a mournful voice. 
If you are lethargic, resolve to take the first small steps toward 
action, however small they might be. Remind yourself that life 
implies action and motion, and even the activity of the most despondent thought flows in great bursts of rhythm. 
All of the suggestions given here will also help in lesser situations, in ordinary bouts of worry, stress, or poor health. Even those 
with very serious diseases can always hope for improvement, so even 
if an individual is considering suicide because of a severe health 
dilemma, the matter should be carefully weighed. 
The most seemingly irreversible physical situations have 
changed even drastically for the better, so each tomorrow does offer 
that possibility. Again, however, the individual must make his or her 
own choice, and without facing the additional burden of worrying 
whether or not the soul itself will be condemned for such an act. 
Nature does not know damnation, and damnation has no meaning in the great realm of love in which all existence is couched. 
Once again, I activate those coordinates that promote your own 
peace of body and mind, and quicken the healing processes — and 
I bid you a fond good early evening. 
("Good afternoon, Seth." 
(4:40 P.M. I read the session to Jane before turning her. She had been 
interrupted at 4:28 by a nurse bringing medication.) 
JUNE 10,1984 
3:02 P.M. SUNDAY 
(Jane seemed to be a bit better — not a lot — and I did mail until she 
said she was ready for a session. She's been starting considerably earlier 
recently,) 
Now I bid you another most fond good afternoon — 
("Good afternoon, Seth.y>) 
— and we will resume dictation. 
Unless physical pain is involved, drugs should be avoided — particularly for those in depressive states. 
(Long pause.) The so-called uppers soon require downers for 
mood regulation, and the mind ends up in a state of confusion, and 
• 268 • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
often a stupor. Such drugs should also literally be considered dangerous for use in old-peoples' homes, for those considered senile, or 
even demented. With some variation these drugs are actually sometimes given to overactive children, where their effects can be very 
unpredictable, and result in moods that encourage suicidal tendencies, even in those so young. 
Many people who use drugs socially arg playing a kind of psychological Russian roulette. Their feelings can run something like 
this: "If I'm meant to live, these drugs won't hurt me, and if I'm 
meant to die, what difference does it make what I take?" They are 
taking a certain kind of chance with their own lives, however — 
those who indulge in such activities — and the stakes can be high. 
It is true that some schools of knowledge almost glorify the use of 
some drugs as encouraging the expansion of consciousness and the 
release of repression. In some ancient cultures, drugs were indeed 
utilized in such a manner, but their use was well understood — and 
more importantly, their use was socially acceptable. Those societies 
were, however, highly ceremonial, and quite as stereotyped in their 
ways as your culture may seem to you. 
(Very long pause at 3:14.) Doctors should be extremely cautious in 
the prescription of mind-altering drugs of any kind, and certainly 
not encourage their use for people in depressed states. Under drugs, 
choices become limited, and certainly people have committed suicide while under the influence of drugs — who may not have otherwise. I am not saying that drugs alone will cause suicide, but that the 
psychology of drugs already includes an attitude that promotes a 
Russian-roulette kind of mentality, that can only add to the problem. 
People use drugs also in order to "let go." It seems as if some 
drugs permit an individual to let clown barriers of fears and repressions, and to emotionally transcend the problems of daily life. The 
fact is, however, that many such people use drugs instead as a kind of 
chemical blanket that has a tendency to smother rather than relieve. 
To "let go" is to trust the spontaneity of your own being, to trust 
your own energy and power and strength, and to abandon yourself 
to the energy of your own life. The word "abandon" itself may strike 
some readers as particularly strong, but each element of nature 
abandons itself to the lifeform. So does each atom of your body. To 
abandon yourself, then, to the power of your own life, is to rely upon 
STARTING OVER FROM THE BOTTOM UPWARD 
• 269 • 
the great forces within and yet beyond nature that gave birth to the 
universe and to you. 
One of the very first steps toward mental, physical, emotional 
and spiritual health is precisely that kind of abandonment, that kind 
of acceptance and affirmation. 
(Long pause at 3:26.) The will to live is also inbred into each element of nature, and if you trust your own spontaneity, then that will 
to be is joyfully released and expressed through all of your activities. 
It can also quite literally wash depression and suicidal tendencies away. 
Take your break. 
(3:28-3:36.) 
Those feelings do indeed encourage expression of consciousness, and release intuitive information that may otherwise be buried 
beneath tensions and fears. 
Such realizations have their own biological effects, stimulating 
all of the healing properties of the body — and also easily propelling 
the mind toward "higher" organizations, in which all of life's seeming inadequacies are understood to be redeemed. 
This feeling of abandoning oneself to the power and force of 
one's own life does not lead to a mental segregation, but instead 
allows the self to sense the part that it plays in the creative drama of 
a universe. Such understandings often cannot be verbalized. They 
are instead perceived or experienced in bursts of pure knowing or 
sudden comprehension. 
The natural world itself is a gateway to other realities. You do not 
have to try and blot out the physical world, or your ordinary consciousness, in order to achieve the necessary knowledge that leads to 
vibrant health or experiences. In fact, the natural world is itself a 
part of other realities, and the source of all realities is as present in 
your existence as in any other. 
The more fully you learn to live, the more the seemingly hidden 
"mysteries of the universe" begin to appear. They do not necessarily 
make themselves known with great clamor or fanfare, but suddenly 
the most innocuous, innocent birdsong or the sight of a leaf might 
reveal knowledge of the profoundest nature. It is ironic, then, that 
many people who seek to discover the "hidden" mysteries of nature 
ignore nature itself, or consider the physical body as gross or somehow composed of lesser vibrations. 
• 2 7 0 TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
In the case of the suicide, however, we see the opposite attitudes 
at their most drastic. To a strong extent, such individuals reject their 
own lives, and often the conditions of life in general. Many of them 
object that they did not want to be born in the first place, and they 
feel that way because they have so thoroughly repressed the will to 
life within them. They also often express a strong feeling of alienation from their parents, friends, family and their fellow men in general. Along the way they have forgotten the cooperative, playful 
ventures of childhood, and the expression of love itself becomes 
most difficult. 
All of the suggestions in this chapter can indeed help break 
down those habitual thought patterns, however, and if such a person 
is seeing a therapist, it is an excellent idea if the entire family join in 
the therapy. 
Oftentimes this is financially impossible, but the inclusion of 
such an individual in some kind of a group situation is an excellent 
procedure. Communication between several people, all of whom 
have contemplated suicide, can also set up an excellent supportive 
situation, particularly with some direction set by a therapist. All 
would-be suicides do not follow through, and many end up leading 
long and productive lives, so that even when negative ideas are present in their most severe forms, there is still hope for improvement 
and accomplishment. 
Those same unfortunate beliefs, feelings, and attitudes are also 
present to a lesser degree, and in different mixtures, in the cases of 
life-endangering diseases. However, those beliefs may not be nearly 
as observable, and many people may deny that they are present at all. 
They are often triggered, finally, by a traumatic life situation — the 
death of a spouse or parent, a major disappointment, or any experience that is particularly shocking and disturbing to the particular 
person involved. 
These attitudes are often present in certain cases of cancer, 
severe heart problems, or other diseases that actually threaten life 
itself. 
In such instances, an understanding of one's beliefs, and a generation of newer, more biologically vital ones, will certainly serve to 
better the situation, and help relieve the condition. 
STARTING OVER FROM THE BOTTOM UPWARD 
• 271 • 
(4:16 P.M. This proved to be the end of the session, though we didn't 
realize it for a while. Jane stopped speaking when we heard a nurse pushing 
the medical cart to a stop outside our door to 330. A few moments later we 
heard her begin to pound away as she pulverized a vitamin C tablet in its 
packet. "I didn't know you could hear vitamin C, "Jane said. I turned her 
on her side at 4:45.) 
JUNE 11,1984 
4:08 P.M. MONDAY 
(I told Jane that I woke up at about 4:00 A.M., worrying about all the 
things I had to get done this week. I was ready to start on another session 
for Chapter 7 of Dreams, but realized I'd have to let that go. I had to go to 
the bank to get checks and money orders to pay taxes and bills, hook up the 
garden hose, and learn how to work the new sprinkler I'd bought to spray 
the flowers out back. Then Wednesday morning 1'm scheduled to see our 
lawyer regarding taxes, Jane's social security, and so on. Later this month I 
should apply for my own social security benefits. There will doubtless be 
other things to do. 
(Soldidn'tget 
to work on Dreams this morning, but hope to tomorrow. 
Trying to finish that book makes me feel like my feet are in quicksand up to 
my knees. 1'm continually losing my sense of involvement, of creative application on a daily basis that is so indispensable, and I'm continually searching for ways to recapture it and keep it going on a daily basis. Jane 
suggested I get a checking account. It would help a little, but I need much 
more than that. 1'm pruning away as much as I can, including a lot of 
business mail and projects we could get involved in. I no longer answer certain business or fan mail. 
(One thing I've learned above all else: I'll never again create a situation like this, where years pass before a book is delivered to the publisher. 
Something has to give, somewhere. I would like to get back to painting at 
least a little each day. This may be necessary — even vital — to my own 
well-being, although I must be careful about giving myself negative suggestions over it. 
(The day was again extremely warm.) 
Now I bid you another most fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
• 2 7 2 TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
We will resume dictation. 
The would-be suicide's problem is usually not one of suppressed 
rage or anger, it is instead the feeling that there is no room in his or 
her private life for further development, expression, or accomplishment, or that those very attributes are meaningless. 
The will to live has been subverted by the beliefs and attitudes 
mentioned earlier. 
People with life-threatening diseases also often feel that further 
growth, development, or expansion are highly difficult, if not impossible to achieve at a certain point in their lives. Often there are complicated family relationships that the person does not know how to 
handle. To numbers of such individuals crisis points come and are 
conquered. Somehow the person learns to circumnavigate the 
unpleasant situation, or the conditions change because of other 
people involved — and presto: the disease itself vanishes. 
In all cases, however, the need for value fulfillment, expression, 
and creativity are so important to life that when these are threatened, life itself is at least momentarily weakened. Innately, each 
person does realize that there is life after death, and in some 
instances such people realize that it is indeed time to move to 
another level of reality, to die and set out again with another brandnew world. 
Often, seriously ill people quite clearly recognize such feelings, 
but they have been taught not to speak of them. The desire to die is 
considered cowardly, even evil, by some religions — and yet behind 
that desire lies all of the vitality of the will to life, which may already 
be seeking for new avenues of expression and meaning. 
(4:20.) There are those who come down with one serious disease — say heart trouble — are cured through a heart transplant 
operation or other medical procedure, only to fall prey to another 
seemingly unrelated disease, such as cancer. It would relieve the 
minds of families and friends, however, if they understood that the 
individual involved did not "fall prey" to the disease, and that he or 
she was not a victim in usual terms. 
This does not mean that anyone consciously decides to get suchand-such a disease, but it does mean that some people instinctively 
realize that their own individual development and fulfillment does 
now demand another new framework of existence. 
STARTING OVER FROM THE BOTTOM UPWARD 
• 273 • 
Much loneliness results when people who know they are going to 
die feel unable to communicate with loved ones for fear of hurting 
their feelings. Still, other kinds of individuals will live long productive lives even while their physical mobility or health is most severely 
impaired. They will still feel that they had work to do, or that they 
were needed — but the main thrusts of their beings still reside in 
the physical universe. 
Each person's purposes are so unique and individualistic that it 
is quite improper to try to make any judgments in such matters. 
There is also the overall picture, for each family member plays a certain part in the reality of every other member. 
A man might die very shortly after his wife's death, for example. 
Regardless of the circumstances, no one should judge such cases, for 
regardless of the way such a man might die, it would be because the 
thrust and intent and purpose of his life was no longer in physical 
reality. 
End of dictation. 
Once again I activate those coordinates that quicken your own 
peace of mind and body, that accelerate your healing processes. 
("Thank you." 4:33 P.M.) 
JUNE 12,1984 
2:58 P.M. TUESDAY 
Now I bid you another most fond good afternoon — 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
— and we will resume dictation. 
Many cancer patients have martyrlike characteristics, often 
putting up with undesirable situations or conditions for years. 
They feel powerless, unable to change, yet unwilling to stay in 
the same position. The most important point is to arouse such a 
person's beliefs in his or her strength and power. In many instances 
these persons symbolically shrug their shoulders, saying. "What will 
happen, will happen," but they do not physically struggle against 
their situation. 
It is also vital that these patients are not overly medicated, for 
oftentimes the side effects of some cancer-eradicating drugs are dangerous in themselves. There has been some success with people who 
• 2 7 4 TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
imagine that the cancer is instead some hated enemy or monster or 
foe, which is then banished through mental mock battles over a 
period of time. While the technique does have its advantages, it also 
pits one portion of the self against the other. It is much better to 
imagine, say, the cancer cells being neutralized by some imaginary 
wand. Period. 
Doctors might suggest that a patient relax and then ask himself 
or herself what kind of inner fantasy would best serve the healing 
process. Instant images may come to mind at once, but if success is 
not achieved immediately, have the patient try again, for in almost 
all cases some inner pictures will be perceived. 
Behind the entire problem, however, is the fear of using one's 
full power or energy. Cancer patients most usually feel an inner 
impatience as they sense their own need for future expansion and 
development, only to feel it thwarted. 
The fear that blocks that energy can indeed be dissipated if new 
beliefs are inserted for old ones — so again we return to those emotional attitudes and ideas that automatically promote health and 
healing. Each individual is a good person, an individiialized portion 
of universal energy itself. Each person is meant to express his or her 
own characteristics ancl abilities. Life means energy, power, and 
expression. 
(Longpause at 3:13.) Those beliefs, if taught early enough, would 
form the most effective system of preventative medicine ever known. 
Again, we cannot generalize overmuch, but many persons know 
quite well that they are not sure whether they want to live or die. The 
overabundance of cancer cells represents nevertheless the need for 
expression and expansion — the only arena left open — or so it 
would seem. 
Such a person must also contend with society's unfortunate ideas 
about the disease in general, so that many cancer patients end up 
isolated or alone. As in almost all cases of disease, however, if it were 
possible to have a kind of "thought transplant" operation, the disease would quickly vanish. 
Even in the most dire of instances, some patients suddenly fall 
in love, or something in their home environment changes, and the 
person also seems to change overnight — while again the disease 
is gone. 
STARTING OVER FROM THE BOTTOM UPWARD 
• 275 • 
Healing can involve help on many levels, of course. The world of 
normal communication I call Framework 1, while Framework 2 represents that inner world, in which indeed all time i§ simultaneous, 
and actions that might take years in normal time can happen in the 
blinking of an eyelid in Framework 2. 
Take your break. 
(3:22-3:36.) 
Briefly, Framework 1 deals with all the events of which you are 
normally conscious. 
Framework 2 involves all of those spontaneous processes that go 
on beneath your conscious attention. When you are very young your 
beliefs are quite clear — that is, your conscious and unconscious 
leanings and expectations are harmonious. As you grow older, however, and begin to accumulate negative beliefs, then your conscious 
and unconscious beliefs may be quite different. 
Consciously you might want to express certain abilities, while 
unconsciously you are afraid of doing so. The unconscious beliefs 
are not really unconscious, however. You are simply not as aware of 
them as you are of normally conscious ones. Negative beliefs can 
block the passageways between Framework 1 and Framework 2. It is 
an excellent idea for those in any kind of difficulty to do the following simple exercise. 
Relax yourself as much as possible. Get comfortable in a chair or 
on a bed. Tell yourself mentally that you are an excellent person, and 
that you want to reprogram yourself, getting rid of any ideas that 
contradict that particular statement. 
Next, gendy remind yourself again: "I am an excellent person," 
adding: "It is good and safe for me to express my own abilities, for in 
doing so I express the energy of the universe itself." 
Different phrases with the same meaning may come into your 
own mind. If so, substitute them for the ones I have given. There are 
endless exercises that can be used to advantage, but here I will only 
mention a few that appear most beneficial. 
For another exercise, then, relax yourself as much as possible 
once more. If you have some disease, imagine it as particles of dirt. 
Tell yourself that you can see inside your body. You may see streets or 
boulevards instead of muscles and bones, but go along with the 
image or images that appear. You might see streets lined with dirt or 
• 2 7 6 TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
garbage, for example. Then mentally see yourself sweeping the 
debris away. Order trucks to come and carry the garbage to a trash 
heap, where you may see it burn and disappear in smoke. 
(Long pause at 3:49.) Instead of the drama I just outlined, you 
may instead see invading armies, attacking home troops. In such a 
case, see the invaders being driven off. The pictures you see will 
follow your own unique leanings and characteristics. 
The unconscious levels of the self are only unconscious from 
your own viewpoint. They are quite conscious in actuality, and 
because they do deal with the spontaneous processes of the body, 
they are also completely familiar with your own state of health and 
well-being. 
These portions can also be communicated with. Once again, 
relax yourself as much as possible. Sit comfortably in a chair or lie on 
a bed. A chair is probably preferable, since it is easy to fall off to sleep 
if you are lying down. You can refer to these portions of the self altogether as the helper, the teacher, or whatever title suits you best. 
Simply make a straightforward request, asking that some picture 
or image be presented in your inner mind, that will serve as representative of those portions of your own inner reality. 
So do not be surprised, for you may see a person, an animal, an 
insect, or a landscape — but trust whatever image you do receive. If 
it seems to be that of a person, or angel, or animal, then ask it to 
speak to you, and to tell you how best to rid yourself of your disease 
or problem. 
If the image of a landscape appears instead, then ask for a series 
of such images, that will again somehow point the way toward recovery, or toward the resolution of the problem. Then follow through 
with whatever reply you receive. 
In all such cases, yovi are opening the doors of Framework 2, 
clearing your channels of communication. Since your physical body 
itself is composed of the very energy that drives the universe, then 
there is nothing about you which that energy is unaware of. Simply 
repeating these ideas to yourself can result in release of tension, and 
an acceleration of the healing process. 
These exercises may suggest others of your own. If so, follow 
through on them — but to one extent or another each reader 
should benefit from some of them. 
STARTING OVER FROM THE BOTTOM UPWARD 
• 277 • 
End of dictation. 
Once again, I bid you a fond early evening, and I accelerate 
those coordinates that bring about peace of body and mind, and 
quicken the healing processes. 
("Thanh you." 
(4:25 RM. Jane's speed of delivery had steadily increased as she progressed with the session. I told her she had done well.) 
JUNE 13,1984 
3:13 P.M. WEDNESDAY 
(It's been a very hot, very busy day. I worked on Dreams for half an 
hour before going down to see our lawyer at 10:00 this morning. As I left the 
house, I was greeted in the driveway by Frank Longwell, who was checking 
up on whether I was watering the back yard and the new tree the way he told 
me to. 
(Frank left right away, but I was still late getting to the lawyer. We 
talked about many things, and he's to get back to me regardingjane's social 
security, disability payments, income, and so on. He's also ordered a birth 
certificate for me from Harrisburg, Pennsylvania and is to check with social 
security about what benefits I may be able to get while still working. 
(On the way home I bought a barbecued chicken at Convenient, and 
made Jane a sandwich for lunch. It was good, almost still warm. She ate a 
good lunch. I did some mail until she told me she was ready for a session.) 
Now I bid you another most fond good afternoon — 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
— and we will continue dictation. 
Again, every effort should be made to insert humor into the 
living situation as much as possible. 
The patient might begin to collect jokes, for example, or funny 
cartoons from magazines and newspapers. Watching comedies on 
television will help — and so, in fact, will any distraction that is pleasing to the patient. 
Crossword puzzles and other word games will also benefit, even 
if only done mentally. It might also be advisable for the patient to 
take up some completely new field of knowledge — to learn a language, for instance, or to study whatever books possible in any field 
to which he or she is attracted. 
• 2 7 8 TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
The more actively and fully such a diversion can be indulged, the 
better, of course, and yet the mental playing of games can be quite 
fruitful, and serve to give the conscious mind a needed rest. 
Everything should be done to insure that the patient is given a 
hand in whatever physical treatment is involved. He or she should be 
enlightened enough through doctor-patient discussions to make 
choices about the treatment. In some cases, however, patients will 
make it clear that they prefer to hand over all responsibility for treatment to the doctor, and in such instances their decisions should be 
followed. It is a good idea for the doctor to question the patient sometimes, to make sure that the decision is not one of the moment alone. 
Whenever possible, it is far better for the patient to remain 
home, rather than live steadily at a hospital. When hospitalization is 
required, however, family members should try to act as honestly and 
openly as possible. It is a good idea for such family members to join 
other groups of people who are in the same situation, so that they 
can express their own doubts and hesitations. 
Some family members, in fact, may be quite surprised by a barrage of unexpected reactions. They may find themselves furious at 
the patient for becoming ill, and then develop unfortunate guilt 
feelings over their own first reactions. They may feel that their lives 
are being disrupted through no cause of their own, yet be so 
ashamed of such feelings that they dare not express them. 
A therapist or a group of other people facing the same problem 
can therefore be of great assistance. The patient may also feel abandoned by God or the universe, and may feel unjustly attacked by the 
disease, thus arousing a whole new tumult of anger, and it is most 
important that the anger be expressed, and not repressed. 
(Through the early afternoon of a very hot day — over 90 degrees — a 
storm had been trying to manifest. Gradually the sun disappeared behind 
heavier and heavier clouds, yet the rain seemed most reluctant to show itself 
1 hoped we'd get a heavy rain for the backyard at the house. A strong breeze 
kept whipping up the airy branches of the mountain ash outside the windows of330, and the room began to cool down a bit. 
(Then there came a stronger wind, and thunder in the distance, and 
the start of a meager rain. Traffic sounded louder. Doors slammed in the 
hospital corridor, and at the bathroom entrance to 330. Through it all Jane 
kept speaking in trance — and I gave up on expecting a real rain.) 
STARTING OVER FROM THE BOTTOM UPWARD 
• 279 • 
Such a person might imagine his or her anger or fury filling up 
the inside of a gigantic balloon that is then pricked by a needle, 
exploding in pieces from the pressure within, with debris falling 
everywhere — out over the ocean, or caught up by the wind, but in 
any case dispersed in whatever way seems agreeable to the patient. 
It is also vital that such people continue to receive and express 
love. If the person is mourning the death of a spouse or close family 
member, then it would be most beneficial for the individual or the 
family to purchase, or otherwise provide, a new small pet. The patient 
should be encouraged to play with the pet as much as possible, and 
to nourish it, to caress and fondle it. 
Often such a procedure will reawaken new stirrings of love, and 
actually turn around the entire affair. This is particularly true if one 
or two beneficial changes simply seem to happen in other areas of life. 
The rearousal of love might well activate Framework 2 to such an 
extent that the healing energies become unblocked, and send their 
threads of probable actions into the person's living situation as 
well — that is, once the channels to Framework 2 are open, then 
new possibilities immediately open up in all of life's living areas. And 
many of these, of course, have a direct bearing on health and the 
healing processes. 
Take your break. 
(3:42. There was a thunderclap not far away. Getting up to stretch, I 
saiv that I'd been mistaken earlier: it hadn 7 actually started to rain yet. But 
it did now, fairly good. We decided to turn Jane on her side early, so I could 
feed her before leaving for the dentist's at 5:45. I'd saved a plate of food 
from lunch for this, in case the supper tray dicln 7 show up in time. It did 
come early, though, just as though we'd asked for it, so Jane had eaten most 
of her supper before I left.) 
JUNE 14,1984 
3:20 P.M. THURSDAY 
(The day was considerably cooler. At least some rain had fallen last 
night. Jane seemed to feel a bit better today.) 
Now, I bid you another most fond good afternoon — 
(uGood afternoon, Seth.") 
— and we will resume dictation. 
• 301 • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
In these, and all situations, it should be remembered that the 
body is always trying to heal itself, and that even the most complicated relationships are trying to untangle. 
(Ifelt a great sadness when Seth delivered this sentence.) 
For all of life's seeming misfortunes, development, fulfillment, 
and accomplishment far outweigh death, diseases, and disasters. 
Starting over can be done — by anyone in any situation, and it will 
bring about some beneficial effects regardless of previous conditions. 
Behind all maladies, in the most basic manner lies the need for 
expression, and when people feel that their areas of growth are 
being curtailed, then they instigate actions meant to clear the road, 
so to speak. 
Before health problems show up there is almost always a loss of 
self-respect or expression. This loss may occur in the environment 
itself, in changing social conditions. In the matter of the disease 
called AIDS, for example, you have groups of homosexuals, many 
"coming out of the closet" for the first time, taking part in organizations that promote their cause, and suddenly faced by the suspicions 
and distrust of many other portions of the population. 
The struggle to express themselves, and their own unique abilities and characteristics drives them on, and yet is all too frequentiy 
thwarted by the ignorance and misunderstanding that surrounds 
them. You end up with something like a psychological contagion. 
The people involved begin to feel even more depressed as they struggle to combat the prejudice against them. Many of them almost hate 
themselves. For all their seeming bravado, they fear that they are 
indeed unnatural members of the species. 
(3:35.) These beliefs break down the immunity system, and bring 
about the symptoms so connected with the disease. AIDS is a social 
phenomenon to that extent, expressing the deep dissatisfactions, 
doubts, and angers of a prejudiced-against segment of society. 
Whatever physical changes occur, happen because the will to live is 
weakened. AIDS is a kind of biological protest, as if symbolically the 
homosexuals are saying: 'You may as well kill us. We might be better 
off than the way you treat us now," or as if it were a kind of suicidal drama 
in which the messages read: "See to what ends your actions have led us!" 
I am not saying that AIDS victims are outright suicides — only that 
in many instances the will to live is so weakened and a despondency 
STARTING OVER FROM THE BOTTOM UPWARD 
• 281 • 
so strong sets in that such individuals often acquiesce, finally, to their 
own deaths, seeing no room in the future for their own further 
growth or development. 
The attitude even of doctors and nurses toward the handling of 
such patients shows only too clearly not only their fear of the disease 
itself, but their fear of homosexuality, which has been considered 
evil and forbidden by many religions. Emotions run at top pace in 
such cases, and the AIDS patients are often shunted away, out of 
human society. Often even their friends desert them. Yet AIDS can 
be acquired by those who are not homosexuals, but who have similar 
problems. (Longpause.) It is a great error to segregate some individuals, like some modern colony of lepers. 
Luckily, the disease will run its course as sociological conditions 
change, and as man's inhumanity to man becomes clear even to the 
most prejudiced. 
Take your break. 
(3:47-4:00.) 
Homosexuals can benefit from the ideas in this book, particularly if small groups get together, examining their own beliefs, and 
reinforcing their will to live, their right to live, and the basic integrity 
of their being. 
Any anger or hostility should also be expressed, however, while 
not being overly concentrated upon. 
Many other diseases that seem to be spread by viruses or contagions are also related to the problems of society in the same manner, 
and when those conditions are righted the diseases themselves 
largely vanish. It should be remembered that it is the beliefs and feelings of the patients that largely determine the effectiveness of any 
medical procedures, techniques, or medications. 
Unfortunately, the entire picture surrounding health and disease is a largely negative one, in which even so-called preventative 
medicine can have severe drawbacks, since it often recommends 
drugs or techniques to attack a problem not only before the problems emerges, but simply in case it may emerge. 
Many of the public-health announcements routinely publicize 
the specific symptoms of various diseases, almost as if laying out maps 
of diseases for medical consumers to swallow. There are many techniques apart from medically conventional ones, such as acupuncture, 
• 2 8 2 TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
the laying on of hands, or the work of people who may be known as 
healers. The trouble is that these other techniques cannot be monitored sufficiently so that their benefits can be honestly appraised. 
The body's own healing processes are forever active, however — 
which is why I so strongly advise that they be relied upon along with 
whatever medical help seems appropriate. But the individual, even 
as a patient, must always have a choice, and have the right to refuse 
any treatment being suggested. 
(4:14.) The main issue is always the vital importance of the individual's belief systems, however, and the sense of worth he or she 
places on body and mind. 
We have been dealing with quite drastic diseases, but the same 
concepts are true in other areas also. There are people who undergo 
a series of highly unsatisfactory relationships, for example, while 
another person might experience a series of recurrent diseases 
instead. In spite of all problems, the life force operates continually in 
each person's life, and can bring about at any time the most profound, 
beneficial changes. The idea is to clear the mind as much as possible 
from beliefs that impede the fine, smooth workings of the life force, 
and to actively encourage those beliefs and attitudes that promote 
health and the development of all aspects of healing experience. 
(4:25.) End of dictation. 
Once more, I activate those coordinates that encourage your own 
peace of mind and body, and quicken your own healing processes. 
A fond good evening. 
("Good afternoon, Seth." 
(4:26 P.M. No one hacl shown up to doJane's vitals — which meant that 
the staff was behind schedule. In fact, no one appeared to do the vitals for 
the rest of the time I was there — until 7:10. For a change we didn't say the 
prayer together. Lately she's wanted to do it after lunch. "Iget too blue when 
you're getting ready to leave," she saicl, "to ivant to do it then any more." 
(Carla, the aide who used to help Jane call me late at night, has been 
on vacation. This afternoon we were speculating that she's about clue to 
return. Maybe when she can call me again, Jane will feel belter.) 
CHAPTER 12 
EARLY INSTANCES OF DEATH OR DISEASE 
IN RELATIONSHIP TO FURTHER 
REINCARNATIONAL INFLUENCES 
JUNE 15,1984 
3:12 P.M. FRIDAY 
N
ow I bid you another most fond good afternoon — 
("Good, afternoon, Seth.") 
— and we will continue dictation. 
Before we discuss other varieties of health and illness as they 
more ordinarily appear, I want to bring up the subject of more or less 
extraordinary conditions — dilemmas of body or mind in early life 
that often seem to have no cause or meaning. 
The universe is meaningful or it is not. Since the universe is 
indeed meaningful, then there must be a reason and a cause even 
for conditions that appear chaotic, cruel, or grotesque. Even in such 
cases, however, at some extent or another the individual can indeed 
start over — or at least those closest to the person in question can 
begin to see a larger framework of existence in which even the most 
dire of physical circumstances are somehow redeemed. 
In many cases, it is the parents of such offspring who suffer more 
than their children, since it seems as if such families were unjustly 
saddled with the most unfortunate woes. 
•283• 2 8 4 TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
We hope to explain this larger framework of existence still 
further, for indeed it also affects the human condition in all of its 
aspects. 
Next chapter: "Early Instances of Death or Disease in Relationship to Further Reincarnational Influences." 
(3:23.) As I said before, the reasons for most physical, mental, 
spiritual, or emotional problems can be found in this one lifetime, 
and because of the nature of simultaneous time, new beliefs in the 
present can also affect those in the past. 
In a basic way, it is possible for present beliefs to actually modify 
the beliefs of a life that is seemingly a past one. I must explain again 
that all lives are lived at once — but in different kinds of focuses. 
Your conventional ideas of time make it simpler, however, to speak of 
one life as happening before or after another. 
Again, no one is punished for crimes committed in a past life, 
and in each life you are unique. The inner intelligence within you 
that gives you each life also gives you the conditions of each life. It 
certainly seems to you, or to many of you, that most people would 
always choose to be born healthy and whole, in an excellent environment, of parents with loving natures and genetic excellence — 
and in other words to grow up healthy, wealthy, and wise. 
Life, however, is far too profound and multitudinous, and requires 
great depths of emotional response and action that could never 
be satisfied adequately by any given set of circumstances, however 
favorable. 
(3:34.) The species is filled with a powerful sense of curiosity and 
wonder, and the need for exploration and discovery, so that even a 
man born as a king through several lives would find himself bored 
and determined to seek out a different or opposite experience. 
In some lives, then, you are born in fortunate circumstances, and 
in others you may find an environment of poverty and want. You may 
be born in excellent health in one life, with a high intelligence and 
great wit, while in still another existence you may be born ill or crippled or mentally deficient. 
It also seems that each fetus must naturally desire to grow, 
emerge whole from its mother's womb, and develop into a natural 
childhood and adulthood. However, in those terms just as many 
fetuses want the experience of being fetuses without following 
EARLY INSTANCES OF DEATH OR DISEASE 
• 285 • 
through on other stages. They have no intention of growing into 
complete human development. In fact, many fetuses explore that 
element of existence numberless times before deciding to go on still 
further, and emerge normally from the womb. 
Those fetuses that do not develop still contribute to the body's 
overall experience, and they feel themselves successful in their own 
existences. An understanding of these issues can gready help throw 
light on the question of early deaths and diseases, and spontaneous 
abortions. 
Take your break. 
(3:45-3:52.) 
These are all part of the continuous undercurrents of life, and 
the same issues apply to many other species whose offspring are lost 
in very early life. 
This is not an uncaring universe or nature operating, but portions of consciousness who choose at whatever levels certain experiences that nourish the living environment, and bring satisfactions 
that may never show on life's surface. 
In the case of human beings, however, many questions certainly 
rise to the fore. I do not want to generalize, for each living situation 
is too unique for that. I do want to point out that all fetuses do not 
necessarily intend to develop into normal babies, and that if medical 
science, through its techniques, ends up in directing a normal birth, 
the consciousness of the child may never feel normally allied with 
physical experience. 
The child may go from one illness to another, or simply display 
an odd disinclination for life — a lack of enthusiasm, until finally in 
some cases the child dies at an early age. Another individual, under 
the same circumstances, might change its mind and decide to go 
along with the experience of normal life. 
It seems unnatural to some people to hear of animals' mothers 
who refuse to nurse one offspring, or sometimes even attack it — 
but in those instances the animal mother is instinctively aware of the 
situation, and acts to save the offspring from future suffering. 
I am not advising that malformed infants be killed, but I do want 
to point out that even in those most severe cases there is meaning 
in such conditions, and the consciousness involved then chooses 
another kind of experience. 
• 286 • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
There are also perfectly healthy, normal children who have 
determined ahead of time that they will live only to the threshold of 
adulthood, happy and flushed with dreams and promises of accomplishment, yet not experiencing any disillusionment or regret or 
sorrow. Such young people die of sickness or accident, but go to 
their deaths like children after a splendid day. In most instances they 
choose quick deaths. 
In one way or another, such children may try to describe their 
feelings to those closest to them, so as to cushion the shock. Usually 
these people are not suicides in conventional terms — although 
they may be. 
(4:12.) Perhaps the greatest variances in human behavior show 
in mental states, and so parents are apt to feel most crushed and 
despondent if any of their children prove to be what is generally 
regarded as mentally deficient. In the first place, the term is a judgment cast by others, and a particular personality may feel quite comfortable in his or her own perception of reality, and only become 
aware of the difference when confronted by others. Most such persons are quite peaceful rather than violent, and their emotional 
experience may indeed cover nuances and depths unknown to 
normal persons. 
Many simply perceive reality from a different focus, feeling a 
problem out rather than thinking a problem out. 
(4:17. Jane took a break ivhen we heard someone pushing what we 
thought was the medicine cart out in the hall toward our room. Then all 
became quiet. When I looked, no cart was in sight. Nor was any aide or 
nurse. It ivas as though we were alone on the floor. 
(I suggested to Jane that she end the session anyhow, since it was getting to be about as long as I could get typed this evening, and I also had to 
go food shopping.) 
I bid you a fond good evening — and once again I activate those 
coordinates that encourage peace of body and mind, and quicken 
the healing processes. 
("Thank you." 
(4:20 P.M. It was still very quiet. No one ever did come in to do Jane's 
vitals. They hadn't yesterday either, Jane said. A new policy? A nurse had 
brought in Jane's Darvoset and aspirin, and that was it.) 
EARLY INSTANCES OF DEATH OR DISEASE 
• 287 • 
JUNE 16,1984 
3:23 P.M. SATURDAY 
Now I bid you another most fond good afternoon — 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
— and we will continue dictation. 
In actuality all of the seemingly erratic genetic variances that 
often crop up in human development are vital to the elasticity of the 
entire genetic system. 
It would not be beneficial, for example, to try to "breed out" 
those seemingly unfortunate, divergent genetic traits. The physical 
system would become too rigid, lose the power of its natural diversity, and eventually bring a dead-end to human survival. 
There is hardly any danger of that possibility, however, since it 
would be nearly impossible to perform such a task even with the 
most developed of technologies — and indeed, the very attempt to 
do so might well immediately trigger a response on the part of the 
whole genetic system, so that new divergences appeared with even 
greater frequency, as compensation. 
There are individuals who do choose ahead of time — i n one 
lifetime or another — to accept such a divergent genetic heritage for 
their own reasons — often to experience life from one of its most 
unique aspects, and sometimes in order to encourage the growth of 
other abilities that might not otherwise occur. 
Human consciousness normally experiences wide sweeps of 
rhythms, varying states of awareness, and its amazing flexibility is 
partially dependent upon its lack of rigidity, its own spontaneous 
inclinations, and its capacity for curiosity, wonder, discovery, and 
emotion. 
(Long pause at 3:35.) It is not too frequently noticed, but many 
so-called mentally deficient people possess their own unique learning abilities — that is, often they learn what they do learn in a different manner than most other people. Many possess abilities that 
are not discovered by others, that are most difficult to explain. They 
may utilize chemicals in a different way than other people do in the 
learning process itself. Some may even have superior understanding 
of physical and psychological space. Their qualifications emotionally 
are also quite advanced, and it is quite possible that they are gifted in 
• 2 8 8 TH E WAY TOWARD H EALTH 
terms of mathematics and music, thoiigh these gifts may never come 
to fruition, since they are unsuspected. 
Many deficient individuals in their way are as vital to the development of humanity as geniuses are, for both preserve the elastic nature 
of human consciousness, and promote its coping qualifications. 
Each person makes his or her own reality, again, but each family 
member also shares the reality of the others. Often, therefore, 
instances of unusual genetic differences may also serve to bring out 
qualities of understanding, sympathy, and empathy on the part of 
family members — and those qualities also are vital to human development. Because the reasons for any such conditions can be so 
diverse, then life should be encouraged even in the face of deformities. If the consciousness involved has its own reasons for living, then 
it will make the most of even the most dire conditions. If instead the 
consciousness has been kept alive despite its own intents through 
medical procedures, it will terminate its own physical life in one way 
or another. 
(Long pause.) It would seem that infants have no belief systems, 
and therefore could not be in charge of their own realities in any 
way. As mentioned earlier, however, the cells of the body themselves 
possess an equivalent in those biological leanings toward health and 
development. Even in cases where physical survival might seem 
pointless, it is also possible for the organism to alter its course to an 
extraordinary degree. 
Children who are labeled mentally deficient or even called 
idiots, can often grow and develop far beyond medical science's suppositions — particularly if they are aided by loving parents who constantly provide stimulation and interest. 
This is not to say that all such children should be cared for at 
home, or that parents should feel guilty if they are forced through 
circumstances to place their offspring in an institution. The intuition of the parents, however, will often direct the most proper 
course in each individual case. If it is understood that there is indeed 
a reason behind such circumstances, then that realization alone can 
help ease the parents' burden, and help them decide which covirse 
to take in their own particular case. 
(Very long pause, eyes closed.) End of dictation. 
EARLY INSTANCES OF DEATH OR DISEASE 
• 289 • 
Once more, I accelerate those coordinates that quicken your 
own peace of body and mind, and encourage your own healing 
processes — and I bid you a most fond early evening. 
("Good afternoon, Seth." 
(4:16 P.M. As I was leaving for the day Jane ashed me what I thought 
of the sessions. I said they were very good — and meant it. It's what I 
expected, I told her. She said that she and Seth had been trying to handle 
some pretty heavy stuff in a certain way so that it wasn't too grim, and 
ended up with upbeat interpretations. I'm not quoting her exactly here by 
any means, however. 
(Jane was interrupted twice during her delivery. She said staff isn't 
going to take her vitals regularly anymore, especially when they're busy.) 
JUNE 17,1984 
2:41 P.M. SUNDAY 
(It was a cold, cloudy day as I drove doiun to the hospital. It had rained 
some last night and this morning. Room 330 ivas on the chilly side to me, 
but Jane was comfortable. 
(Carla was back from vacation, and I thought she might help Jane call 
me tonight. As I was taking my nap in 330 this afternoon, Margaret Bumbalo called, inviting me across the street for supper this evening.) 
Now I bid you another most fond good afternoon — 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
— and we will resume dictation. 
Each life influences each other life, and some portion of the personality retains memory not only of past lives, but of future lives also. 
When reincarnational studies are embarked upon, on occasion 
people remember some instance of past-life experience, but conventional ideas of time are so strong that so-called future memory is 
blacked out. 
The inner self is aware of all of your existences, in other words. It 
sees where and how your many lives fit together. It is only because 
you are so oriented outward from birth that this inner self can sometimes seem alien or distant and unrelated to the self that you know. 
It would be impossible to be consciously aware of all of the infinitesimal details that exist in even one life; your consciousness would be 
• 290 • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
so full and cluttered up that you would be unable to make choices, 
or to use free will. 
It would be even more difficult to try to handle the information 
of many lives at one time. In your terms, "it" takes time to think, and 
you would be so caught up in thinking itself, that action would be 
impossible. The inner knowledge of all of your lives, from your point 
of view, is in the same category as those automatic processes that 
underlie your existence. 
That is, you know about your other lives, basically, in the same 
way that you know how to breathe or digest your food. A different 
kind of knowing is involved. 
This does not mean that all conscious knowledge about your 
own reincarnational existences is forever beyond you — for through 
various exercises you can indeed learn to recall some of that information. It does mean, however, that you are innately aware of all of 
your existences, and that the knowledge gained in one life is automatically transferred to another, whether that life be present, past, 
or future. 
(2:54.) You may therefore be trying out many different kinds of 
experiences, sometimes endowing yourself with super attributes and 
strength, relying upon the body's powers above all other considerations, while at the same time in another life you use and develop 
unusual mental abilities, enjoying the triumphs of creative thought, 
while largely ignoring the body's agility and strength. 
I do not mean to imply that you necessarily deal with opposite 
kinds of behaviors, for there are endless variances — each unique — 
as consciousness expresses itself through physical sensation, and 
attempts to explore all of the possible realms of emotional, spiritual, 
biological, and mental existence. 
I want to stress that within each life full free will operates once 
the conditions of that life are set. 
Take your break, and we will continue. 
(2:59. Jane had a smoke while I did some mail. A fine rain fell. Resume 
at 3:36.) 
That is, if you have been born in poor or depressed circumstances, then free will will not alter the conditions of that birth. 
It can help you become wealthy in adult life through the choices 
that you make. It should be helpful, and certainly somewhat 
EARLY INSTANCES OF DEATH OR DISEASE 
• 291 • 
comforting, to realize that even unfortunate birth conditions were 
not forced upon you by some outside agency, but chosen at inner 
levels of your own reality. 
The same applies to almost any situation. Religion holds some 
ideas that are in complete opposition to each other in regard to the 
nature of suffering in general. Some believe that suffering is a punishment sent by God for past or present sins, or even omissions, 
while other religious schools insist that suffering is sent by God as 
evidence of his particular love for the individual involved: "God must 
love you very much, because he sent you so much suffering." (As Jane 
has been told by several nurses.) 
That remark, and similar ones, are often made to ill persons. 
The idea is supposed to be that suffering is good for the soul, is a way 
of atoning for one's sins, and in some fashion the implication is 
made that such suffering in this life will be more than compensated 
for in heaven. 
Such concepts encourage individuals to feel like victims, with no 
control at all over the conditions of their own lives. 
(It also arouses my sense of irony and dismay — for the nurses who 
told Jane such things are presumably in better health than she is. Their 
implications were that God loved Jane more than he loved them, and would 
reveal this in heaven. What kind of heaven does this leave those healthier 
individuals 
to look forivard to, then ? Surely a lesser one, in perhaps 
unknown ways ? This ought to give such people pause . . .) 
Instead, it should be realized that as uncomfortable as suffering 
is, it does somehow have a meaning in the context of your entire 
existence — again, that it was not thrust upon you by some unjust or 
uncaring exterior force or nature. 
To some degree, that kind of understanding can help alleviate 
suffering itself to some extent. I am not advocating a fatalistic 
approach either, that says more or less: "I have chosen such and such 
an unfortunate condition at some level I do not understand, and 
therefore the entire affair is outside of my own hands. There is nothing I can do about it." 
For one thing, again, almost all situations, including the most 
drastic, can be changed for the better to some extent, and the very 
attempt to do so can increase a person's sense of control over his 
or her own circumstances. This does not mean that those adverse 
• 292 • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
situations can be changed overnight in usual terms (though ideally 
that is also possible), but that the sense of control over one's life 
encourages all of the mental and physical healing properties. 
(3:52.) In terms of "starting over" at such a point, the main thing 
to remember is not to expect too much too fast, while recognizing 
that instantaneous cures are indeed probabilities. 
Again, mind games, the insertion of humor and diversion, are 
extremely valuable, so that you are not trying too hard. Some people 
try too hard to be spontaneous, while others are frightened of spontaneity itself. The knowledge of reincarnational lives is spontaneously held, and you can receive profound insights from that 
knowledge. This occurs when you are not looking for it, but when 
you are familiar enough with the entire concept, so that you realize 
such knowledge is available. 
I may or may not return. Once again I do activate those coordinates that quicken your own peace of mind and body, and accelerate 
your healing processes. 
("Good afternoon, Seth." 
(3:58 P.M. Jane did call this evening — at about 10:00, just as 1 was 
sitting down to begin typing this session. Fd stayed much longer at the 
Bumbalos than Fd planned. The supper was delicious, and afterward John 
and I had an interesting conversation ranging over a number of subjects. 
He'd read Jane's latest book, The Education of Oversoul Seven, and 
liked it very much.) 
JUNE 18,1984 
4:02 P.M. MONDAY 
(We had a heavy rain at times last night and this morning.) 
Now I bid you another most fond good afternoon — 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
— and we will continue dictation. 
The reincarnational heritage is rich, however, and it can have a 
tendency to assert itself under certain conditions. 
I am not speaking of usual, but fairly unusual events, when, in 
one fashion or another, reincarnational memory seems to bleed 
through to the present life. Again, this is not usual experience. It 
happens infrequently. On some occasions — sometimes in periods 
EARLY INSTANCES OF DEATH OR DISEASE 
• 293 • 
of poor health or seeming senility — such instances may occur. They 
are more apt to happen in adolescence, though I do want to stress 
that we are speaking of extraordinary cases. 
Old people often begin to exercise their own consciousness in 
ways that they had not done earlier. There may be less diversions to 
take up their thoughts. They may be lonely, and then quite surprisingly find themselves casting about for different kinds of experience — experience seemingly most difficult to achieve in the 
physical world under their present circumstances. 
Since they are often frightened and unsure of the future, they 
are more apt to cast their thoughts backwards into their early childhoods, reaching for their earliest memories, and mentally try to gain 
comfort from the remembered sounds of beloved voices, only to 
mentally glimpse other images than they expected, or to hear other 
voices than those for which they yearned. 
In fact, fragments of many episodes from many other lives may 
rush into their consciousness, and in most cases they are, of course, 
quite unprepared for the experience. On the other hand, usually 
such episodes are highly reassuring, for along with them rides the 
inner assurance that life has been lived before, many times. 
The individuals involved may then return to normal consciousness, but if they talked or muttered while the affair was happening, 
any observers might take it for granted that delirium was involved. 
Drugs should not be prescribed under those conditions, unless the 
patient becomes highly resdess and confused, and requests them. In 
most cases, however, the experiences do not leave any detrimental 
side effects. 
The same kind of event may happen in periods of poor health, 
or in over-drugged states. They are less easily handled, however, 
under drugged conditions, since the consciousness does not have 
the full agility to depend upon in periods of stress — unusual stress. 
The same can occur in adolescence, and easily be misinterpreted as 
a schizophrenic episode. 
This happens perhaps more frequendy than the other cases 
mentioned, but usually such events are not repeated. They remain 
only as memories, having opened up the person's mind to larger 
visions of life than he or she may have entertained before. 
End of dictation. 
• 294 • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
Once again I activate those coordinates that quicken your peace 
of body and mind, and so reinforce your own healing processes. 
("Thank you." 4:32 PM. 
(Hospital staff caused Jane to break off the session twice. Her vitals 
were taken, though. Temp up to 101.4 — Jane was angry. Shannon said 
the reading was up because it was a hot, muggy day. 
(A light rain had begun just before I left 330, but it quickly turned into 
a dotmpour as I drove home. The rainfall was so dense at times that I could 
hardly see where I was going. It was both refreshing ancl exhilarating.) 
JUNE 19,1984 
2:41 P.M. TUESDAY 
(The hospital was hardly a quiet place, what with fire trucks ancl police 
cars pulling up beneath our windoiv with sirens screeching and wailing, 
and with people in the hall outside 330 pushing carts that rattled and 
sounded like a bushel of pots and pans jouncing around — all of this as 
Jane was ready to begin the session. I couldn't help wondering what any 
patient would do who really needed a little peace and quiet.) 
Now I bid you another most fond good afternoon — 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
— and we will resume dictation. 
Thus far we have been dealing with conflicting beliefs, however — 
and most of those can be tackled in the context of this life alone. ^. 
These beliefs may have physical or mental repercussions, though 
in most cases the two do not occur at once. We have dealt with some 
of the numerous physical dilemmas than can result. In other 
instances the individual encounters the difficulties on mental or 
emotional levels. One portion of the personality might be wholeheartedly in favor of good expression of personal power, and be stimulated to express and use his or her energy and strength. Another 
portion of the personality may be just as terrified of power or its uses 
as the other segment exults in it. 
Instead of developing physical complications, in usual terms, 
sometimes one portion of the personality actually does act with 
assurance, power, and energy, while another equally valid portion 
refuses to use energy or power in any way whatsoever. The ideas are 
/ / 
EARLY INSTANCES OF DEATH OR DISEASE 
• 295 • 
so opposing, and such equal adversaries, that the conscious personality can hardly bear to be aware of both at once — 
(2:50. Georgia, Mary Jean, and Jan came in to kid around, eat chocolate-covered graham crackers, and drop veiled references to the birthday 
party they're planning for me tomorrow. I pretended innocence — I think. 
They asked what my favorite cake was lohile telling me theirs — and I said 
chocolate with chocolate icing. 
(I read the las t line of the session back to Jane. 2:58.) 
In such cases, while one portion of the personality is expressing 
itself, and in command of the usual conscious abilities, the other 
portion lies acquiescent, latent, and unexpressed. 
The individual may act purposefully, with power, energy, and 
strength, for varying lengths of time. Then sometimes without warning the frightened, inactive portion of the personality will take over 
the normal abilities of consciousness — acting depressed, taciturn, 
and communicating very poorly with others. 
One portion of the personality will carry on conscious behavior — 
go to work, shop, or whatever, while the other portion of the personality will not remember performing those acts at all. 
Take a hypothetical case. Call Norma A the assertive part of the personality, and Norma B the passive partner. Norma A may go out dancing, go to a bar, then turn the entire proceedings over to Norma B, who 
finds herself in noisy surroundings, surrounded by people she does not 
remember, and with no idea how she reached her present destination. 
Her trend of memory will go back to the last time that she was in 
charge of consciousness, and she will have — or may not have — 
any idea of the existence of Norma A at all. Norma A may enjoy 
action, sports, dancing and bodily activities, while Norma B may 
prefer reading, walking, or painting. 
Such personalities may even have separate sets of friends — 
Norma A and B each having their own companions. Though these 
personalities may seem so divergent, they are connected with each 
other, however, and they may on occasion set up their own rather 
bizarre kind of communication. They may write mysterious notes to 
each other, leaving them where they are bound to be found — yet 
notes using a special code or symbols or drugs, because too clear a 
communication would disrupt the entire relationship. 
• 296 • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
People may actually carry on such existences for years, until 
some event or another shows that something is amiss: one of Norma 
A's friends might meet a friend of Norma B, for example, or the gaps 
in memory might finally become so frequent that it is obvious something is wrong. 
Norma A and B represent fairly simple examples of schizophrenic behavior, and indeed I have kept the story simple to keep 
the issues clear. Norma A may actually grow into a more and more 
assertive or belligerent personality, even displaying violent tendencies at times, while on the other hand Norma B might become even 
more timid, depressed, and solitary. 
On other levels, however, each one is well aware of the other's 
presence, and on those levels they do react to each other's activities. 
This means, of course, that the entire amnesia process, regardless of 
how perfect it seems, is a surface one. I have used the different 
beliefs about power as an example, but any belief may be involved if 
it and its opposite are held in nearly equal weight. 
(3:20.) One portion may believe that sex is natural and good, 
while the other portion believes vehemently that sex is evil and 
depraved. Here we will use a man for a hypothetical case. Joe A may 
be an excellent husband, bread-winner, and father, a church-goer 
who believes in the beauty and goodness of sex. Joe B may hold the 
opposite viewpoint most intently — that sex is at least evil, perhaps 
sent by the devil, and below or beneath the dignity of a good man. 
On topside Joe A may go to church frequently, be kind jand considerate to his family, and, say, come home from work every night for 
supper. He may carry on a fruitful accomplished existence for varying lengths of time. 
Then, however, perhaps with no warning, he may suddenly refuse 
to make love with his wife, become hostile with his children, stop off 
for a few drinks after work, before supper, or even begin seeing a 
prostitute, or begin an affair — often with a woman he considers 
beneath his own station. 
Joe A may be quite startled to discover bottles of whiskey lying 
around in his dresser drawers, when he hardly drinks liquor himself 
at all. Joe B may suddenly "come to" in a strange bedroom, in a compromising position with a woman it certainly seems to him he has 
never seen before in his life. 
EARLY INSTANCES OF DEATH OR DISEASE 
• 297 • 
On the other hand, Joe B may find himself in the middle of a 
family picnic, or other gathering — events that bore and displease 
him — or worse, he may not even remember his family at all. The 
more complicated such dilemmas become, the harder they are to 
keep secret, however, because their very complications multiply the 
chances of discovery. And there are, of course, variations. 
Joe B, while drinking, might suddenly be sent back to his Joe A 
self. The kinds of communication can be very unique and bewildering, ranging from number codes to nonsense verses, or to the hearing of imaginary voices, which serve to remind one portion of the 
self that there is also another seemingly alien personality involved in 
his or her existence. 
Take your break. 
(3:35. Three staff did Jane's vitals. Her temp tuas up again — 
99.4 — and no one knew why. There was much vehicle noise below our 
window. Resume at 4:07.) 
In many instances very strong feelings of persecution and paranoia 
can be involved, but these will be discussed in the following chapter. 
In the kind of schizophrenic behavior we have just been discussing, hypnosis is frequendy used as therapy, often in an attempt 
not only to introduce the two levels of the personality to each other, 
but also to uncover the time they originally split off in such a fashion. 
While hypnosis can be of considerable value in the hands of an 
excellent professional hypnotist, it still has serious drawbacks as a 
treatment under these conditions. Because of its very nature, hypnosis can end up segmenting the personality still further. 
Under such therapy it sometimes seems that new, lesser personality fragments are uncovered, but it is very possible that these 
instead are created by the therapy itself. The hypnotist obviously 
wants tolcure his patient, and all forms of schizophrenia are intellectually intriguing. The segments of the personality that are involved 
are bein^ given great attention, and they may seize upon that attention, seeking ways to further dazzle the hypnotist while at the same 
time sabotaging recovery. 
It is far fetter to address whatever personality is in prominence 
during the Spssion, to convince it of the therapist's concern and 
interest, while letting it know that at other levels it is quite aware of 
the existence of its other segments. 
• 298 • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
People with schizophrenic difficulties often enjoy word games 
and puzzles, so they may well use these to confuse any therapist. The 
very fact that such a person considers any kind of therapy does mean 
that he or she is ready to tackle a considerable challenge. It can be 
put to each segment of the personality, then, that it will be quite a 
challenge for each to become aware of the other. You might compare the situation to someone who has been separated from a sister 
or brother for years — explaining, however, that the separation is 
psychological and not physical. 
(Longpause at 4:2L) In a fashion, all of these activities are variations of others. Instead of forming such segmented selves, another 
person, as mentioned earlier, might enjoy the use of power, yet be 
so frightened of it that he or she experiences an epileptic episode 
instead of a schizophrenic one. 
Before we return to a discussion of other physical dilemmas, we 
will discuss some further unusual psychological events, and their 
connections with conflicting beliefs. 
End of dictation. 
Once more, I activate those coordinates that quicken your own 
healing processes and peace of body and mind. 
("Thank you" 
(4:26 P.M. This was Jane's longest session, I think, since she's been in 
the hospital. "Longer than you want, probably," she said, meaning that it 
would take me more time to type tonight. It's at about the limit I can handle 
without falling behind. 
("I forgot to tell you," she said. "I got the heading earlier for the next 
chapter: "'Messages'From Gods, Demons, Fleroes, ancl Other Prominent 
Persons — or, More Conflicting Beliefs.") 
CHAPTER 13 
"MESSAGES" FROM GODS, DEMONS, HEROES, 
AND OTHER PROMINENT PERSONS — OR, 
MORE CONFLICTING BELIEFS 
JUNE 20,1984 
3:50 P.M. WEDNESDAY 
\ / r~T^oday 1'm 65 years old, but certainly don't feel it. I guess it's supX posed to mark a milestone in one's life — especially that of the male 
of the species — but I have no plans to retire, quit working, or give up the 
creative life. I feel I'm doing better than ever. 
(The crew at the hospital did have a birthday party for me, and even 
though I knew what they were up to, it was still a delightful surprise, what 
with their obvious good will and cheers, the cards, and the food — more 
than we could eat, at least Jane and I. Mary, the head nurse, made the 
chocolate cake with chocolate icing. I showed them my fancy patterned 
undershirt as a joke, and received the appropriate ooh's and ah's. Even 
some strangers in the hall outside 330 saw it and laughed. I also bletv out 
all of the candles on the cake — perhaps 25 of them — in one breath, 
which I don't think s taff expected I could do. 
(I had a distinctly full feeling along about 2:30, and we still had food 
left over. I nibbled at it throughout the day, until I felt I'd better stop. Various people stopped in to wish me a happy birthday. 
(Margaret Bumbalo called before I left Jane and invited me to supper, 
but by then I was full. I stopped at their house to get the spaghetti for tomorrow' s supper. Joe is almost bald from the chemotherapy, and very iveak, his 
•299• 300 • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
son John said. They hacl a package of books for me also. John made me a 
scotch and soda, like I'd had there the other evening, and I began to feel its 
effects in no time. By then I was actually half bombed, so I didn't get down 
to typing this session until 9:50 P.M.) 
I bid you another most fond good afternoon — 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
— and we will resume dictation. 
Before we continue, I would like to remind the reader that in the 
middle of these or any of the other problems we have been discussing, there may be a period of depression, or the feeling that 
one's own problem ha§ no solution after all. 
Whenever this occurs, the steps I have given before should be followed. Briefly, immediately refuse to worry about the future or the 
past. Tell yourself you can worry another time if you want to — but 
for the moment you will not be concerned about the past or the 
future. 
Remind yourself that for all you might have read, or heard, or 
deduced earlier, it is certainly not inevitable that all unfortunate situations take the darkest of tones, and that indeed the opposite is 
true; for if such were the case, the world and all of life would have literally been destroyed through disasters and calamities. 
Concentrate upon the present moment — but more, concentrate upon the most pleasant aspects of the present moment. If that 
moment has distracting, unfavorable aspects, then resolutely bring 
into your mind whatever images delight or please you at the 
moment. These may be very simple. Remember the smell of lilacs, 
for example, or try to hear the crisp crunch of snow, or try to visualize an ocean or lake. All of these procedures will serve to quiet your 
mind and body, and build up your own reserves. 
(4:00.) This is an excellent policy to follow, because you can start 
it wherever you are. It will help alleviate fears and doubts at least 
momentarily, so that then you can pursue the entire issue later, with 
more assurance. 
End of chapter. Take your break. 
(4:02. We heard the medicine cart in the hall. A young nurse brought 
in Jane's Darvoset and aspirin. All was quiet and peaceful in the hospital 
now. Resume at 4:13.) 
"MESSAGES" FROM GODS, DEMONS. HEROES 
• 301 • 
We will begin the next chapter. The heading, as given earlier, is 
correct. 
Conflicting beliefs about the nature of reality can bring about 
dilemmas in almost any form, for the individual will always try to 
make sense out of his or her surroundings, and try to at least see the 
world as a cohesive whole. 
Some of the most complicated ways of trying to put conflicting 
beliefs together are often mental or emotional ones. The more incohesive the individual feels the world to be, the greater his or her 
efforts will be expended in an attempt to put the world back together. 
Some people possess beliefs that are so in opposition to each 
other that they are forced into some of the most complicated mental 
or emotional footwork. Their problem will seem so gigantic that only 
some interference from an outside source will be sufficient to give 
the individual a sense of wholeness and sanity. A person may become 
so frightened of using his or her own power of choice or action that 
the construction of an artificial superbeingis created — a seemingly 
sublime personage who gives orders to the individual involved. 
(Long pause at 4:25.) Again, let's use a hypothetical case — this 
time of a man named Donald. 
Donald may be so terrified of making choices, so indecisive, that 
he constructs an imaginary superbeing who orders him to do thus 
and so. If a decision comes up on a job, for example, then the superbeing will order Donald to take one course or another. Donald has 
given up accepting responsibility for his actions. This imaginary personage may say that it is God, or a famous hero from the present or 
the past, or Jesus Christ, or Mohammed, and the personality 
involved will be quite certain that such is the case. 
Donald, for example, may hear the hallucinated voice of the god 
or hero. The voice may be so frequent that it becomes highly distracting, or it may only appear in times of undue stress. 
Again, we are starting out with a fairly simple picture. Our friend 
might also be convinced that he himself is evil, unworthy, or even 
depraved, the lowest of men or women. In such circumstances 
an individual might then construct an artificial devil or demon who 
annoys him constandy, and even orders acts of a highly destructive 
nature. 
• 302 • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
The individual, like Donald, has also given up the responsibility 
for his own choices, and feels that he or she cannot be held responsible for any destructive acts that might be committed. 
(Longpause at 4:37.) Any of the two kinds of personalities mentioned might also begin to feel persecuted, chased, or harassed by 
some outside agency. Among the agencies chosen, of course, are the 
FBI, the CIA, the Russian Secret Police, the Ku Klux Klan, or any 
controversial group given to acts of violence for whatever purposes. 
Sometimes such episodes last for long periods of time, but they 
can also appear for just several days, clear up spontaneously, and 
return again perhaps years later. 
End of dictation. 
Once again, I activate those coordinates that accelerate your own 
peace of body and mind, and quicken the healing processes. 
("Thank y OIL" 
(4:41 P.M. Jane saicl, "I have the feeling that whenever Seth gives exercises like that, that he's giving them just when I need them, and the reader 
too. Some of the stuff he advocates I do real well, and others I don't." 
(Very true, I think. I've often had the feeling that Seth's material parallels Jane's own situation, whatever that may be at that moment. I think 
it's especially true with this book. Large portions of it could be Seth's material for her alone.) 
JUNE 21,1984 
4:03 RM. THURSDAY 
(I'd just gotten yesterday's mail sorted out this morning when another, 
lesser batch arrived today, both from Pren tice-Hall and independently. 
(Going through the mail ivas rewarding, though —for in various letters I found checks adding up to more than $375. We are both grateful and 
touched. Now tohen a batch of mail arrives I have to open the letters at once 
to see if money has been sent. Otherwise the letters may lay there for some 
time before I investiga te them. I used to keep them unopened until I picked 
them up to answer. A California resident called Maude Cardwell in Texas, 
to tell her that he has our permission to market the audio tapes ofJane's ESP 
class, which ended in 1975. We haven't given anyone permission to do 
that, so I'll have to investigate the whole thing.) 
Now I bid you another most fond good afternoon — 
"MESSAGES" FROM GODS, DEMONS. HEROES 
• 303 • 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
— and we will resume dictation. 
Some people may seem completely normal in behavior unless 
certain subjects are brought up in the course of a conversation, or 
unless some stimulus in the environment arouses them. 
For instance, the individual might be talking along normally 
enough when he or she hears the sirens of a police car in the distance. Instandy the person might leap up, convinced that that was 
evidence of the pursuit of the FBI or other agency. 
The car with the siren might disappear, yet the alarmed person's 
attitude and actions may very well instandy cause his or her companion to realize that something was clearly amiss. The disturbed person 
may immediately begin a long tirade, describing previous episodes 
in which he or she was hunted from city to city. There may be further 
complications, in which the person insists that phones were bugged, 
letters opened, and privacy was constandy invaded. 
This might be the very first sign to the person's companion that 
anything was wrong at all. In most such instances the tirade will continue for some time, while in other far lesser episodes it might 
instead simply leap to disordered, confused thoughts about being so 
pursued. Or instead, the individual might embark upon a rather 
heated discussion of police forces in general. 
In actuality, people in those circumstances are often so frightened of the use of power that the idea of being under constant surveillance actually lends them a sense of protection. 
Take your break. 
(Resume at 4:25.) 
The point is, that in such circumstances the person will try to use 
evidence from the outside world to prove that he is indeed being 
pursued. 
In the same fashion, the person who hallucinates the voice of 
God or a demon actually does so to preserve the idea of sanity in his 
own mind. As long as he or she believes that a god or demon is 
involved, then the person can consider the entire affair most extraordinary, decidedly apart from usual experience, but valid. 
If the therapist tries to convince such a person that the hallucinated personage does not exist, then this threatens the person's concepts of personal sanity. 
• 304 • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
End of dictation. 
Once again, I activate those coordinates that quicken your own 
peace of body and mind, and encourage your healing capacities. 
(i(Thank you." 4:30 P.M.) 
JUNE 22,1984 
3:07 P.M. FRIDAY 
Now: I bid you another most fond good afternoon — 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
— and we will continue dictation. 
It is vital, then, that any therapist convinces the client that while 
the superbeing is a self-construction, and/or that the voices are hallucinations — this does not mean that the client is insane. 
An effort should be made to help the client understand that 
errors of thought and belief are responsible for the condition — 
and that the removal of those erroneous beliefs can relieve the situation. The therapist should make it clear that he understands that 
the client is not lying, in ordinary terms, when he reports hearing 
voices from the devil. 
According to the particular case in point, the therapist should 
then try to point out the errors of thovight and belief involved, and 
also to explain their more or less habitual cast. 
First, the ideas must be disentangled, and then the habitual 
behavior will begin to disintegrate. The therapist should also assure 
the client that on many subjects and topics of thought and conversation, the client operates quite well. The subject itself is so vast that, of 
course, an entire book could easily be devoted to it, so it is impossible to cover all the issues that may be involved with such cases here. 
Some of the errors concern the misinterpretation of physical 
events. The individual — convinced he or she is being pursued by 
some secretive organization — again, may hear the sirens on a very 
real police car. The error is the assumption that the vehicle is pursuing the individual rather than some other party. The therapist can 
help the client learn to question his or her personal interpretation 
of such events. 
All such cases can have their own peculiar complications. In the 
case of secondary personalities, the main operating portion who 
"MESSAGES" FROM GODS, DEMONS. HEROES 
• 305 • 
usually directs activity might be male, displaying all of the usual male 
characteristics. The secondary personality may seemingly be female, 
however, even speaking in a femininelike voice. Or the opposite 
might be the case. 
It is also possible for the individual to dress in male attire, while 
the secondary personality wears feminine clothes — or vice-versa. 
(3:25.) What we are involved in mainly, however, are the characteristic periods of seeming amnesia, occurring usually involuntarily, 
often without any transition except perhaps for a headache. 
In this category, I am not referring to individuals like Ruburt, 
who speak for another personality with a sense of ease and tranquillity, and whose resulting information is excellent knowledge — the 
obvious products of uncommon common sense that proves to be 
helpful to the individual and others. 
Behind all of those instances we have been discussing, however, 
there is again the need for value fulfillment, that has been blocked 
largely by conflicting or even opposing beliefs. 
(Very long pause at 3:31.) Regardless of how unbelievable it might 
seem to some readers, it is true that even the most destructive events 
are based vipon misinterpretations of reality, opposing beliefs, and 
the inability to receive or express love. In fact, that kind of rage is the 
mark of a perfectionist caught in what seems to be the grasp of a 
world not only imperfect, but evil. 
Take your break. 
(3:34. Jane's vitals ivere taken. I did a couple of letters until she was 
ready to resume, then read the last line to her. Resume at 4:10.) 
This brings us to another most dangerous belief — that the end 
justifies the means. 
The greatest majority of destructive acts are committed in line 
with that belief. It leads to a disciplined overrigidity that gradually 
cuts down the range of human expression. 
You should be able to see, in fact, that the problems we have 
been discussing begin by limiting the field of available choices, and 
thus curtailing the range of expression. The individual will try to 
express himself or herself to the best degree possible, and so each 
individual then begins a concentrated effort to seek out those 
avenues of expression still open. All of the constructive beliefs mentioned throughout this book should be applied to all of the instances 
• 306THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
• 
in this chapter. The individual must feel safe and protected enough 
to seek its own development and aid in the fulfillment of others. End 
of dictation. 
Once again I accelerate those coordinates that activate your own 
peace of body and mind, and increase your healing processes. 
("Thank you. * 4:18 P.M.) 
JUNE 23,1984 
3:28 P.M. SATURDAY 
(Yesterday after breakfast Jane hacl bloocl taken for tests, but we haven 't 
heard any thing about results yet. This noon I met Jeff Karder in the emergency room —just 
as I was thinking about him. He said he's worried 
about reports he's getting that Jane isn't as comfortable as she used to be. I 
said that such periods seemed to run in cycles, that I watch Jane and would 
always call someone if I thought anything else was amiss. Jane agreed with 
the cyclical description.) 
Now I bid you another most fond good afternoon — 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
— and we will resume dictation. 
One of the most rare and extraordinary developments that can 
occur in schizophrenic behavior is the construction of a seeming 
superbeing of remarkable power — one who is able to convince 
other people of his divinity. 
Most such instances historically have involved males, who claim 
to have the powers of clairvoyance, prophecy, and omnipotence. 
Obviously, then, the affected individual was thought to be speaking 
for God when he gave orders or directives. We are dealing with "godmaking," or "religionmaking" — whichever you prefer. 
In almost all such instances, discipline is taught to believers 
through the inducement of fear. Put very loosely, the dogma says 
that you must love God or he will destroy you. The most unbelievable 
aspects of such dogmas should, it seems, make them very easy to see 
through. In many cases, however, the more preposterous the legends 
or dogmas, the more acceptable they become. In some strange fashion followers believe such stories to be true because they are not 
true. The inceptions of almost all religions have been involved one 
way or another with these schizophrenic episodes. 
"MESSAGES" FROM GODS, DEMONS. HEROES 
• 
307 • 
The person so involved must be extremely disturbed to begin 
with: up in arms against social, national, or religious issues, and 
therefore able to serve as a focus point for coundess other individuals affected in the same manner. 
(Long pause at 3:42.) In a fashion. Adolf Hider fell into such a 
classification. Although he lacked that characteristic mark of speaking for a superbeing, this was because he frequendy regarded himself as the superbeing. The trouble is that while such religions can 
also inspire people to acts of great sympathy, heroism and understanding, their existence rests upon drastic misreadings of the 
nature of reality. 
If the major religions have been touched, then there have also 
been numberless smaller cults and sects throughout history into the 
present that bear that same stamp of great psychological power and 
energy, coupled with an inborn leaning toward self destruction and 
vengeance. 
To varying degrees, other less striking individual cases can bear 
the same sense of magic and mystery. 
There is certainly no need to romanticize schizophrenic behavior, for its romanticlike elements have long been coupled in the 
public mind in an unfortunate manner, seeming to place the 
madman and the genius in some kind of indefinable relationship. 
Such beliefs are apparent in statements such as: "Madness is the 
other end of sanity," or "All genius is touched with madness." 
Beneath these ideas is the fear of the mind itself, the belief that 
its abilities are fine and dependable up to a point — but if it goes too 
far then it is in trouble. 
What does it mean to go too far in that connotation? Usually it 
means that knowledge itself is somehow dangerous. Period. 
In some cases, however, the constructed superbeing can deliver 
astute comments on national, social, or religious conditions. 
Most such personages, however, begin to prophesy the end of 
the world, from which the chosen people — whoever they may be — 
will be saved. More than a few have rendered specific dates for this 
worldly foreclosure — dates which have come and gone. Many 
people still continue to follow the very same dogmas that seemed to 
have proven themselves wrong; the personage comes up with a 
newer excuse, or a newer date, and things go on as before. 
• 308 • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
Again, however, even in far simpler cases, the constructive personage will often make predictions that, incidentally, do not 
predict — and almost always give orders and directives that are to be 
followed without question. 
There are many other deep psychological connections beneath 
schizophrenic behavior, but since this book is also devoted to other 
subjects, we will go on to other ways in which conflicting beliefs 
bring about mental or physical dilemmas. 
End of dictation. 
Once again, I bid you a fond early evening, and activate those 
coordinates that quicken your own peace of body and mind, and 
encourage the healing processes. 
("Thank you." Once again, staff interrupted Jane twice while she was 
speaking for Seth. 4:25 P.M.) 
CHAPTER 14 
NIRVANA, RIGHT IS MIGHT, 
ONWARD CHRISTIAN SOLDIERS, AND THE 
HUMAN BODY AS A PLANET WORTH SAVING 
JUNE 24,1984 
3:23 P.M. SUNDAY 
/ 
A canker sore that began to erupt at supper time last evening really 
bothered me while I tried to sleep. I was up three times, and this 
morning it seemed the swelling and tenderness were worse than ever. To cut 
the story short, Td used the pendulum last night, and it insisted that Td 
developed the canker out of worry because I wasn't answering fan mail. 
(I used the pendulum again this morning, as soon as I was out of bed, 
and received the same answer. Last night it hadn't seemed to do any good. 
This time, though, almost as soon as Fd finished giving myself some gen tle 
positive suggestions, I suddenly began to feel better. All at once I knew Td be 
able to eat breakfast — maybe not in comfort, but at least eat. I felt the 
swelling begin to subside as though a balloon had been pricked. 
(As I shaved, I felt the improvements continue — again, as if by magic. 
I said thanks to my subconscious. I'dfell so rough when I got up this morning that I'd considered seeking emergency medical aid — very rare for me. 
Through the day the improvemen ts continued: supper was easier going than 
breakfast and lunch had been. And once again, 1'd reinforced my faith in 
that simple tool, the pendulum —for me, at least. 
(Jane, too, was doing belter today. She'd had a sore gum for a couple of 
days, and that ivas better.) 
• 3 0 9 • 310 
• 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
/ 
Now I bid you another fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
We will continue dictation, starting a new chapter, to be called: 
"Nirvana, Right is Might, Onward Christian Soldiers, and the Human 
Body as a Planet Worth Saving." 
Few people are much concerned personally with the esoteric situations mentioned in our last chapter. Many people are involved, 
however, with various religious ideas and philosophies, whose effects 
are quite unfortunate in personal experience. The majority of individuals have bouts of poor health now and then, from which they 
recover — so that all in all a fairly comfortable medium is struck. 
It is unfortunately often — but not always — true that individuals who carry strong religious feeling are often bothered more than 
usual by poor health and personal dilemmas. The fact is that religions have been the carriers of some of the best ideas that man has 
entertained — but it has also held most stubbornly to the most troublesome concepts that have plagued mankind. 
You cannot divorce philosophy from life, for your thoughts and 
opinions give your life its meaning and impetus. There are some 
people who believe that life is meaningless, that it has no purpose, 
and that its multitudinoiis parts fell together through the workings 
of chance alone. Obviously I am speaking here of scientific dogma, 
but such dogma is far more religious than scientific, for it also 
expects to be believed without proof, on faith alone. 
(3:37.) Such ideas are bound to color any of their followers' 
ideas about other subjects also: sexuality, economics, and certainly 
concepts of war and peace. 
Again, each portion of nature is propelled by the inner vitality, 
energy, and life force within it. The physical body cannot flourish if 
the individual believes that it and its works are without meaning. Such 
philosophies do not give man a stake in nature, or in the universe. 
All of life is seen as heading for extinction in any case. The entire 
concept of a soul, life after death, or even life from one generation 
to the next, becomes largely doubtful, to say the least. In such a 
philosophical world it would seem that man had no power at all. 
(3:43. Donna came in to take Jane's temp: 98.8.1 didn't tell Jane, but 
a couple of times I'd actually fallen asleep for very brief periods while Seth 
spoke — something I'd never done before. The welcome feeling of release 
NIRVANA. RIGHT IS MIGHT 
• 311 • 
from tension and worry that I'd achieved through using the pendulum this 
morning ivas continuing. Indeed, I'd had trouble sticking to my work on 
Dreams this morning, even as I began to rebound with more energy and 
relaxation at the same time. 
(I read the last paragraph to Jane. Resume at 4:10) 
As mentioned earlier, those concepts can have a hand in the 
development of would-be suicides, particularly of a young age, for 
they seem to effectively block a future. 
The same ideas are so dead-ended, however, that they often trigger 
a different kind of response entirely, in which a scientist who has held 
to those beliefs most stubbornly, suddenly does a complete doubletake. This can propel him or her into a rather severe schizophrenic 
reaction, in which the scientist now defends most fanatically the same 
ideas that he rejected most fanatically only a short time before. 
With some variations, the same kind of "sudden conversion" can 
occur when a person who has berated religious concepts and beliefs 
suddenly does a double-take of a different kind, ending up as a twiceborn Christian. 
Both mechanisms suddenly line up the belief systems in one particular manner, knocking aside all doiibts but accepting instead a 
strict obedience to the new belief system, and a new reorganization 
of life itself beneath that new cause. 
End of dictation. 
Once again, I quicken those coordinates that accelerate your own 
peace of mind and body, and so encourage the healing mechanisms. 
{"Thank you." 
(4:20 P.M. "I notice I didn't get any Darvoset yet, "Jane said as soon as 
she was out of trance. Someone usually brings it around 4:00. A nurse did 
bring it within a few minutes. 
(I'd left the house a little early this noon so that I'd have a bit of extra 
time to go up to room 522 at the hospital, to see if Joe Bumbalo was there — 
but he wasn 'I. I made the trip again after leaving Jane, and this time found 
him. We had a pleasant exchange for about half an hour. Joe lay in bed 
with his eyes closed the whole time, although he alertly followed our talk. He 
goes back on chemotherapy tomorrow. Margaret told me a couple of days ago 
that he'd gone back in the hospital because of uncontrolled blood sugar. 
This evening she told me the doctors were controlling the diabetes with 
insulin so Joe could accept the chemotherapy. 
• 312 • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
/ 
(When I pulled into the driveway at home, John Bumbalo came walking ou t of his garage with a large piece of lemon pie for me. Margaret and 
I had been kidding about her lemon pie at the hospital She'd called John as 
I drove home.) 
JUNE 26,1984 
3:31 P.M. TUESDAY 
Now I bid you another most fond good afternoon — 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
— and we will continue dictation. 
The phrase, "Might is right," can just as well be written the other 
way around. 
For centuries it was taken for granted that God was on the side of 
the strongest, richest nation. Surely, it seemed, if a country was poor 
or downtrodden, it was because God had made it so. 
Such ideas literally held people in chains, fostering slavery and 
other inhumane practices. The same unfortunately applies to the 
Eastern concept of nirvana, and to the Christian idea of heaven. 
Both have been used by those in power to hold down the masses of 
people, to justify shoddy and inadequate living conditions by promising future bliss in the world after death. 
There are many differences between the ideas of nirvana and 
heaven, but each has been used not only to justify suffering, but also 
to teach people to seek pain. The idea has been that the more persecuted and maligned a person is, the greater will be the reward in a 
future existence. 
I want to avoid concentration upon esoteric practices in this book, 
but they do sometimes impinge upon the subject matter at hand. 
The ideas of penance, fasting to excess, the personal abuse of the 
body, svich as self-flagellation — all of those practices are conducted 
in the belief that suffering is something to be sought in itself. In such 
a way pain becomes a sought-after goal, and pleasure becomes subverted into pain. 
Quite ordinary people often believe, then, that suffering itself is 
away toward personal development and spiritual knowledge. In matters of health, such beliefs can have most unfortunate results. They 
are often responsible for needless sacrifices of physical organs in 
imprudent operations. 
NIRVANA. RIGHT IS MIGHT 
• 313 • 
Some individuals become anxious and worried if they think they 
are too happy — for to them it means that they are not paying sufficiendy for their sins. They may be threatened by some undeniable 
danger, until finally in one way or another they seek out their own 
punishment once again — wondering all the time why they are so 
frequendy besieged by poor health or disease. 
This kind of syndrome can affect individuals, families, and to 
some extent entire nations. They mitigate direcdy against man's 
health, survival, and exuberance. 
Constant fears about nuclear destruction, or other such catastrophes can also fall under this classification. 
Take your break. 
(4:04. Jane had heard the medicine cart in the hall, but a few minu tes 
passed before a nurse came in with the Darvoset Jane said she'd belter close 
out the session. 
(4:22.) End of dictation. 
Once again, I accelerate those coordinates that activate your 
peace of body and mind, and encourage your own healing processes. 
("Thank you." 
(Peggy Gallagher visited briefly during the session, to tell me that a 
camera I wanted to buy was on sale at a certain store. 
(I told Jane that I hoped Frank Longwell had gotten his young friend to 
mow the grass this afternoon, as he'd promised to do this morning, but nothing doing. As I drove up our road, 1 saw at once that the grass wasn 'I cut. The 
place looks terrible, although Frank said some of the wild flowers he planted 
ou t back are jus t beginning to show through the s traw and grass mulch. 
(Jane called tonight at 9:35, just as 1 was typing the session.) 
JUNE 27,1984 
3:02 P.M. WEDNESDAY 
(Jane doesn't appear to be doing too well — her body is up to something, 
I told her. Today her feet bothered her considerably. There is swelling on her 
right shoulder, and I also thought her cheeks looked swollen. I've seen such 
signs before, but do not recall what they mean t, if any thing. Today her temperature ivas 100 degrees — up again. She's had such swings in recent days, and 
ate little lunch and less supper, saying she had to take it very easy in order to 
keep the food down. No nurses have said anything to doctors, as far as I know. 
• 314 • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
/ 
(The day was quite cool, and intermittently cloudy. I thought it was 
going to rain, which meant that Frank tuouldn 7 be doing the grass again. 
[And I was right about that] 
(I didn 7 think she'd want to have a session, orfeel like it, but Jane said 
she did. When she began her voice was quite weak and distant at the beginning. Pauses as usual.) 
I bid you another fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
We will resume dictation. 
Large masses of people became so convinced of God's eventual 
vengeance and retribution that they began to plan for it. 
Their lives became a way of avoiding pain instead of seeking out 
pleasure or satisfaction. This is true of individuals, but it also applies 
to many so-called survival groups, who congregate in one or another 
portion of the country, collecting supplies to carry them over the 
holocaust and to defend their families from those who might steal 
their provisions. 
Most such people expect a period of chaotic time, in which all 
laws are broken down. Another version stresses the economic area, 
foreseeing the collapse of the economy, anarchy, and other conditions that pit one individual against the other. 
These people believe, of course, that any given situation will 
worsen, and be carried to its most disastrous end. That attitude 
colors all of their other beliefs and actions. Some use religious 
dogma, and others rely upon scientific dogma to prove their cases, 
but in any case, they are presented with a world of deception and 
vengeance. 
Good mental or physical health can hardly flourish under such 
conditions. There are instead most beneficial groups in this country 
and abroad, who actually, actively, yet peacefully join together to 
work for worldwide nuclear disarmament, and also to tackle such 
questions as nuclear waste. Their efforts are directed in other ways 
also, as they try to convince all areas of the world to share their 
wealth and foodstuffs equally. 
These may be "highflying" goals, however they are positive in 
nature, aimed toward accomplishment and achievement, and they 
collect the energies of the people together in a way that stresses 
cooperation and understanding. 
NIRVANA. RIGHT IS MIGHT 
• 315 • 
Again, the end does not justify the means — so no amount of 
war is ever going to produce a meaningful peace. 
Such ideas affect every level of life, from the most microscopic 
onward. It is not that plants understand your ideas in usual terms — 
but that they do indeed pick up your intent, and in the arena of 
world survival, they have a stake. 
I do not want to romanticize nonhuman life either, or to overestimate its resources, but nature also has its own ways — and in those 
ways it constantly works toward survival of life in general. Nature may 
not bail you out, but it will always be there, adding its own vitality and 
strength to the overall good and health of the planet. 
Remember what I said earlier about the connections between 
disease and nondisease states. Communication flashes between 
viruses and microbes, and they can change in the wink of an eye. 
Once again, then, ideas of the most optimistic nature are the biologically pertinent ones. 
Take your break. 
(Resume at 3:52. Jane's voice was somewhat stronger, her pace a little 
faster.) 
This is a good place to bring up again some extreme food practices, such as overfasting, and an obsession with so-called natural 
foods. 
I am not talking about a natural and healthy interest in the purity 
of foodstuffs, but of a worrisome overconcern. This is often carried so 
far that no food seems perfectly satisfying, and the concentration 
becomes focused upon the fear of food, rather than upon its benefits. 
Behind many such attitudes is the idea that the body itself is 
unworthy, and that starving it somehow cuts down on the appetites of 
the flesh. You usually end up with a flurry of different kinds of diets. 
Some concentrate almost exclusively on protein, some on carbohydrates — particularly rice — but in any case the large natural 
range of available foods and nutrients are cut out. 
This keeps the body in a state of constant turmoil. Some people 
are so convinced, in fact, that eating is wrong that they diet until they 
become ravenously hungry, then overeat and force themselves to 
vomit up the residue. 
Other people, in a well-meaning attempt to watch their weight, 
skip their breakfasts entirely — a very poor procedure. It is far better 
• 316 • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
/ 
to eat moderate amounts of food in all of the food ranges, and to consume smaller portions more often. I realize that your social mores also 
dictate your eating habits — but four light meals a day will overall serve 
you very well, and give the body a more steady, regulated nourishment. 
These food ideas are important, since they are passed on from 
parents to children, and parents often use food as a way of rewarding 
a child's good behavior, thus starting the youngster out toward conditions of overweight. 
End of dictation. 
I bid you a fond early evening, and accelerate those forces that 
quicken your peace of body and mind, and release the healing 
processes. 
("Thankyou."End 
at 4:10 P.M.) 
JULY 4,1984 
4:04 P.M. WEDNESDAY 
(This morning I received a very upsetting phone call from JeffKarder. 
He too is upset that Jane is obviously much more uncomfortable these days 
than she used to be — than two months ago, say. He doesn't want her to 
suffer. Jeff doesn't suggest antibiotics at this lime, but tolcl me that the ulcers 
on Jane's right knee and left hand won't heal themselves, and that the new 
swelling on the lop of her right shoulder may turn into another such area. 
fit didn't. 1 Jane has a traveling infection, he believes, and he hopes it 
doesn't get into her bloodstream. I've suspected the same thing. Jeff said an 
operation would be needed on the knee to correct the condition. 
(I had many questions after the call, of course. I felt sad for Jane and 
what was happening to both of us. I also felt angry at the role she's chosen, 
even while I thought I understood it, basically. When Jeff called I ivas reading the last portion of the first session in Jane's book, The Individual and 
the Nature of Mass Events — for April 18, 1977, in connection with 
a note 1'm doing for Dreams. The passages are on death and suicide — 
natural death, no less, and how we continually interfere medically with 
people's chosen time of death. Hardly a coincidence, I realized. 
(In interpreting those passages, I saw that Jane would have died, given 
her own choice, a couple of years ago, but her plan was interfered with by me 
and the hospital personnel. Although she obviously played a vital part in keepNIRVANA. RIGHT IS MIGHT 
• 317 • 
ing herself alive, I believe that that action came after her own natural, chosen 
time of death had been subverted. She changed her mind, in other words. 
Otherwise, nothing would have kept her alive, no treatment of any sort. 
(I was also angry that Jane hadn't allowed anything to come through 
in sessions about herself for some time. I think this means that her sinful 
self, or whatever, has once again clamped down. It doesn't want her to 
recover. The grea t question, then, is why those portions of the self would — 
and do — continue their terribly destructive ways, even to the point of 
bringing about their own death — for if allowed to, I think, death would be 
the end result, the final s tep along their chosen path. 
(I've also thought for some time that there might be clues to Jane's seeming dilemmas in reincarnation — which Seth hasn't gone into at all. This 
is not permitted. 
(I took Mass Events to 330 with me. Jane was a bit better, yet still 
uncomfortable. She could keep some medications down, but was very careful about food. I'd forgotten to make her a promised corned-beef sandwich, 
and she'd been counting on that for supper. Georgia had told her Jeff had 
called me, ancl her version of the call was pessimistic indeed. Jane knew of 
Jeff's concerns. 
(Jeff suggested that we do nothing at the moment, while he monitors 
Jane's condition. Her temperature has varied, but has generally been okay. 
Yesterday afternoon it had been 100, but after supper it was down to 98.7. 
This morning it was a bit lower. I told her the swelling on her right shoulder looked a bit reduced. But her cheeks are swollen ancl somewhat blotchy, 
which Jeff hacl noticed this morning. Later in the afternoon the cheeks and 
shoulder both looked a bit better, and Jane acted better. 
(Yesterday I'd told Jane that I knew her "body was up to something." 
But what ? I said tha t I hoped it wasn 7 ano ther case of her improving while 
getting toorse — which I used to rant about in years past. We had a long 
talk. I said I wanted information on whether she wanted to live or die — or 
whether she ivas trying to die her own natural death, in line with that excellent information in Mass Events. I wanted to know what her sinful self 
thought about what it was doing to her body, if it cared, if it even understood that it's protective actions threatened its own existence. Or was her 
death the ultimate goal of the sinful self? I saicl the situation must be a 
common one. I felt I was onto something here, but wasn 'I quite sure what — 
something close to the more basic human condition that is little understood. 
• 318 • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
I told Jane it would be a joke if those portions of the self we're blaming for 
her condition, really are the truest, most simple and honest portions after 
all, and that their roles in bringing about her natural death were being subverted by our conscious-mind meddling and interference. Just where is the 
"truth"? I asked. 
(The afternoon passed without Jane having a session. She'd cried several times as we talked — mourning most of all, I thought, that she would 
probably never get home again, see the house and grounds, and so on. I felt 
like crying myself, for I felt that she was right. She said she ivas too upset to 
have a session. I said I wanted stuff on her, not the book. She said she'd 
been having the longer sessions to get information she could use on 
herself— that each day she tried to put it to use. News to me. I said maybe 
she'd been trying too hard. By 4:25 she still hadn't had a session, and I 
didn't think she would. 
(We also discussed fane's fears that she'd done all she could in this life, 
and thus was ready to bow out of physical existence. I told her tha t if she 
wanted to leave I couldn 'I, and wouldn 'I try to hold her back, ancl that I'd 
never have her hooked up to survival equipment. I wouldn't want that done 
to me, either. And all the time we talked I couldn't help but just miss, just 
fail to understand exactly why she was doing what she was doing. Nor have 
1 forgotten Seth 5 statement a feiv months ago that basically neither of us 
have done any thing wrong. 
(But so fearful and reluctant are we to face or to grasp ideas about 
death that run counter to what we've been taught, that we'll literally do 
almost anything to ourselves in order to prevent nature's plan from working 
in its own natural and creative way. How can we really go against what's 
been drummed into us since the day we were born ? 
(During our talk Td cited a long list of things that in my view Jane has 
given up over the years, at the never-satisfied behest of portions of the personality that were now in complete control. It's all gone now except for her 
lying in bed, and she can't even do that in peace these days. She'd even 
given up all reading, even with the new glasses we so eagerly sought from 
Jim Baker. The supporting easel Td made for her to use in reading, sits in 
the closet of330. Jane used it just once. She said she doesn 'I use it or do any 
reading because of the longer sessions. 
(After my nap I asked her why she didn 'I read more, to keep in touch 
with the world, and got quite a response from her. She got angry and 
shouted that she would read more if I wanted her to. I laughed — my first 
NIRVANA. RIGHT IS MIGHT 
• 319 • 
of the clay, I said — and told her that she was only saying that because I 
wanted her to read more — not because she'd suggested that she do so on 
her own. Later, she did suggest I bring in some reading matter. I told her 
that Mass Events was still a terrific book. "So why isn't it a household 
word?"I askecl. No answer. 
(At the end of her outburst about reading, Jane ended up by saying 
something important — that herfailure to read was another example of her 
doing something wrong— "And that's what we're talking about, isn't it? 
All those things I'm doing wrong?" Too true. When I saicl I wouldn't bug 
her any more about reading, she said I talked like a martyr. So how can one 
win in such a situation, when either way is rejected? 
(There's no use going to all the work to present a detailed summary of 
the complicated series of events that have transpired since June 28. Jane is 
still very ill. I was surprised when she said she'd try to have a session today. 
At times her voice was so weak I hacl to ask her to repeat phrases or words. 
("I'm going to skip the preliminaries," she saicl.) 
The main issue involved, once again, is the trust of the body. 
The condition itself is an unfortunate aspect of the hospital environment, but you leapt to the conclusion that the very worst was 
involved. Ruburt did fall prey, in your terms, (underlined twice), to 
a flu-like condition — but the additional fear added immeasurably, 
prolonging the situation. 
End of session. 
("Thank you." 4:07 P.M.) 
JULY 17,1984 
7:00 RM. TUESDAY 
Dictation: (Time, 7:00-7:10 P.M.) 
Ou tside of my house 
there are sparrows 
and a robin 
outside of my door, 
and maybe a emu 
or a rabbit, 
and it's nice to know 
that they 're there. 
• 3 2 0 THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
t 
The small woods are still 
in the side yard, 
and chipmunks and squirrels 
are running free. 
In the evening it's nice 
to know it's all there. 
The breeze bloivs 
through the side trees and 
the sweet smell of earth 
comes through the 
screen door, and there are 
promises in the air 
that remind me of 
my girlhood 
and the dreams that 
drifted there. 
JULY 18,1984 
4:00 P.M. WEDNESDAY 
Dictation: (Time, 4:00-4:15 P.M. Revised July 19) 
1'm looking forward to autumn, 
which isn't so far away, 
and 1'd like to come alive 
as fully in flesh as I ever have, 
and let the quickness of autumn 
bring all my life to newly rise in wisdom 
and knowledge and time. 
I don 'I want to die yet. 
That's the purpose as clear as any I have. 
I want to arouse and live with ease through my flesh 
with some gallantry and love. 
There are winds in the high Sierras — 
wherever the hell they are — 
but it's nice to know 
that the universe sings 
even in places I haven't been. 
NIRVANA. RIGHT IS MIGHT 
• 321 • 
And there are high adventures that rise to circle the moon, 
and shadows that leap 
like wild asses 
in worlds that whistle and curl. 
For everywhere there is magic, 
and it swirls through my molecules 
with a secret life that dances 
and splashes against 
the rocky thoughts of my mind, 
and there are new mornings happening 
everywhere in all of my bodily parts. 
Let me live while I wonder and wander 
through my nature's multitudinous paths. 
JULY 22,1984 
1:35 RM. SUNDAY 
Dictation: (Time, 1:35 P.M.) 
The Cupboard said, 
"Fve got lots of cupcakes 
and cookies, Mr. Bear. 
Fd like to share them 
with you —just you and me 
alone. We'll have a little parly 
and maybe sing a little song." 
The Bear said, "Whoops, 
slow down, Mr. Cupboard. 
While Fm sure your purposes 
are good, I swear you can 
be a mean cuss sometimes, for a 
creature made up of 
such lovely wood. 
I know you've got a trick 
here someplace, though Fm not 
smart, so eat your cookies 
alone, but God bless your 
heart, dear heart." 
• 322 • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
Dictation: (Time, 2:15 P.M.) 
Td rather sit down 
with a pussycat 
out in the sun, where all 
the secrets are free, 
and dance on a path 
smelling sweet buttercups 
and chasing after 
early fireflies 
and cavort through tiny 
mountain paths 
where the air is 
brigh t and free — 
then take out a pair of 
binoculars, and see 
as far as I can see. 
So here's to 
pussycats and flowers, 
and rainbows and lilac trees 
too. So have a lovely 
morning and smile at the 
mountain air 
because each day is 
actually the prettiest 
day you9U ever have. 
Dictation: (Time, 2:27 P.M.) 
The air has memories 
of every place it's been, 
so the coldest 
air in the Arctic 
remembers palm trees 
and balmy ivinds, 
and a breeze that blows 
in Maine's deep woods 
remembers southern 
nights that glistened 
years and years ago 
around the coast of 
southern France. 
NIRVANA. RIGHT IS MIGHT 
• 323 • 
JULY 25,1984 
6:50 RM. WEDNESDAY 
Dictation: (Time, 6:50-7:00 P.M.) 
The Queen of Frogs 
The queen of frogs 
adjusted her crown 
and called for the finest 
prince of the realm, 
and while she waited she massaged 
her beautiful manicured toes. 
She said, "Fm sending you on a mission 
as mysterious as can be, 
fori want to collect 
the loveliest nights and days 
to decorate our kingdom walls. 
We're going to have the most spectacular art gallery 
that the world has ever known, 
where we can contemplate 
the shining nights and days, 
and keep them for our own." 
The prince blinked and said, 
aDear lovely queen, surely this you must not do, 
for the world would weep itself 
asleep, and soon die of a broken heart. 
As it is, the beau ties of nature belong to us all. 
Nobody can steal them away, 
for they exist by themselves 
in the world of the mind 
ivhere no thieves can ever go." 
• 324 • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
JULY 27,1984 
2:17 P.M. FRIDAY 
Dictation: (Time, 2:17-2:20 P.M.) 
Suppose there was a puncture 
way out in the air 
in a place where nobody knew. 
Well, I bet that somebody'd patch it up 
from the other side 
so that it lasted for a 
hundred mare years. 
JULY 30,1984 
4:04 P.M. MONDAY 
(After lunch today, I shoioed Jane the last two poems she's dictated at 
the hospital — those forJuly 25 and July 27. Then a little later she told me 
to turn down the TV and get out my pad. She dictated another. 
There is a message 
in a poslbox 
mean t for me alone. 
It may be in front 
of some old barn, 
hidden in Ohio, 
or maybe it's in Timbuktu 
or in some postbox 
by the sea. 
It's been there for centuries, 
waiting just for me. 
It may be far closer, though, 
wailing for me where 
my life and the message 
sing the same lifesong. 
NIRVANA. RIGHT IS MIGHT 
• 325 • 
(Jane said she didn't want to hear it when I asked her if she wanted me 
to read it back to her. I told her I liked it, but in retrospect I see that it's content is far more revealing than I'd first realized. I believe it literally deals 
ivith Jane's questioning over whether to live or die. 
(Rather than go into more detail here, I'll move to the session, which Jane 
began quite a bit later. I was surprised that she said she'd have one: "I don7 
know whether I can do this, Bob, or how far I'll get, but I'm going to try .. . " 
(I should add that after reading her the poetry and her new dictation, I 
read her the last three sessions for Seth's The Way Toward Health, given 
on June 24, 26, and 27. Jane clidn7 ask for these, but left it up to me to pick 
out something to read. 
(Jane's Seth voice was average, her delivery good. I thought she carried 
off the little session very well.) 
In any case, there are new lives growing and maturing within 
each individual, whatever his or her age or circumstances. 
The idea of survival reaches far beyond this life experience, and 
each person has new physical and spiritual existences ever ready — 
for there is no such thing as extinction. Alive or dead in usual terms, 
you are always conscious and aware and yourselves, and you are 
always a part of universal ventures in which you have always been 
involved, whatever your states of consciousness. 
You are supported, never abandoned, and always couched lovingly in the great yet intimate presence of All That Is, whose love 
forms your breath, your life, your death, as in which the unknown 
divinity is always blessed and ever known. 
It is known and unknown, forming all stages of creativity, and 
you are held within it, graced to be a part of the divine framework of 
All That Is. 
(End at 4:09 P.M. 
("That can be the end of the book, you know. Or maybe I'll do a little 
more, "Jane said. "Whatever happens, Bob, I'd like all of the material published someday, if it can be done. Not to put a burden on you. Maybe if you 
can 7 do it, you can get some help." 
("What brought all of this on VI asked, knoiving quite well the answer. 
("The whole thing, "Jane said. "I don 7 know whether I'm going to live 
or die." She spoke quite matter-offactly. "Whatever I'm going to do, I'm 
going to do." 
• 326 • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
("I know you've been thinking it over, whether you want to live or die, "I 
said. "Ever since you stopped eating, aroundJuly 4. It's been obvious to me." 
(Off and on through the afternoon I'd felt like crying, as I'd become 
more and more sure that Jane was indeed thinking things over. She had a 
smoke and we talked until about 4:40. 
(Jane said she treasured every day we'd been together throughout our 
marriage. I did too — and in those 30years I don't believe we'd been separated more than four or five days. I said I probably couldn't publish all of 
the material by myself. Also that I'd probably not marry again. Jane said I 
could take up with Sue — although I doubt if Sue would care to do that. 
(I said I wished we'd never left Sayre, and she agreed. Maybe things 
would have been differen t. She said, *No autopsy." When I asked her if she 
wanted to be buried or cremated, she expressed no strong wish for either 
mode, but finally chose cremation — maybe because I said what would I do 
if I wanted to move out of town a feio years after she'd been buried. She 
hadn't thought of that. She said as far as she knew her grandfather and 
grandmother and others were buried in Saratoga, though we aren't sure 
about her mother. Her father, Del, is buried somewhere in Florida, we 
guess — we don't know where. 
(After I turned her I broke down crying when I tried to tell her how 
much I loved her. Jane cried too. I couldn't believe this was happening, even 
after all of the signs that have accumulated oroer the years. The import and 
impact of today's session made things quite clear. 
(After I had her situated on her side, I sat back for my usual nap, but 
didn't actually sleep much. I felt terribly sad. Jane had talked about how 
much she loved nature, and how she wanted to see the house one more time, 
and the cats. I told her about the four deer — three bucks and a doe — that 
1'd seen out back this morning, nibbling away in the so-called wildflower 
garden. Some blood-red poppies are up now. 
(Jane ate a little of several things for supper — about as she's been 
doing the last few days. This is actually an improvement for her, for since 
around July 4 she hasn't taken in any solid food with very few exceptions — and then only a crust, one might say. After ivatching her behavior 
as the month passed, I could see that she was indeed starving herself, and 
would die if she kept it up. She's lost a great deal of weight; her arms look 
skeletal — so do her legs to a lesser degree. 
(After supper, I learned several things. Jane had been told by the nurses 
a few days ago that she could have morphine whenever she wanted it; it's 
NIRVANA. RIGHT IS MIGHT 
• 327 • 
given by injection. She also said that yesterday she resumed taking her thyroid medication, which she'd stopped taking July 4 — the day of that last 
little session. She also revealed that she hasn 9t gone to hydro for three days, 
and will have to give in and go; she was trying to avoid more pain. 
(I read the session to her at 6:55. "It's extremely well done," I said. 
("Well, that's it," she said. "That's the end." 
("Of the book, or the Seth material?" 
("I don't know. We'll see. Maybe I'll start on something else and go 
right through it," she said. She almost laughed. "But right now I'm trying 
to get through each night ancl day." 
(Her nigh ts have been particularly rough, I learned. "If only I coulcl get 
a little peace of mind, how wonderful it would be," she said. 
(I asked her if she wanted to try some free association. I said I thought 
she'd broken that off because she was afraid it ivouldn't work — although 
I'd thought it showed signs that it was working. I also thought she'd 
stopped free associating because it had collided with those deeply held beliefs 
that had led to her physical immobility. I told her that during the last month 
I'd given up hope, and that she must have, and that her condition was a 
perfect mirror of that loss for each of us. She seemed to agree. 
(I'd like to add that while there's life there's hope, and that as Seth has 
said many times, one who doesn't want to die — as Jane said the other clay 
she didn't — won't for any reason. But I told Jane that I couldn't ask her 
to do something she didn't want to do. I added that I wouldn't want to live 
under such conditions. 
(And so there it is. Carla called for Jane at 9:15, as I was typing this 
material. She told me that Jane loved me, and that she was having "a better 
night." I askecl Carla to give Jane my love. And the fact that my wife is 
having a better night may mean something, or not... 
I'd told her this 
afternoon that I'd been prepared to receive a call from the hospital at any 
time, telling me to get my ass cloiun there because my wife was failing ancl 
the end was near. And Jane smiled ancl saicl that she'd been tempted many 
a time to have me called to come see her, especially late at night. 
(I love you, Jane, and don't know whether to laugh or cry. Ifeel like the 
latter. I ivish you the best, whether you leave or stay. Today's session says it 
all, I guess, for it means that belter things lie ahead for you — and me — 
and if that's the case, what have we got to worry about? 
(I will close on this note, though in all sincerity, I think those who are 
left behind have it far rougher than those who go 
...) 
• 328 • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
JULY 31,1984 
3:54 P.M. TUESDAY 
(fane ate a better lunch today — that is, not enough to keep a bird 
alive, but still an improvement over most of the month ofJuly: A little soup, 
a little egg yolk, coffee, a little custard, chocolate milk, and so forth. 
(After lunch I read her the session for yesterday, after she'd been unable 
to read it with either pair of her glasses. Her eyes behaved the same way yesterday. I ended up asking Jane if she wanted to try free association after 
we'd talked a while, but got no definite answer. 
(She was so much in pain that I ended up giving her at least ten minutes of what I thought were good suggestions. Hypnosis may have entered 
in. The bout seemed to help her relax; her arms and hands became easier 
and looser. She seemed to lay in bed more easily, and referred to the experience several times through the afternoon. Til try more such things. She loved 
the wild flowers I brough t in from the house. 
(Later I told Jane of a remark Frank Longwell had made the other day, 
after Td explained to him that she'd been having a very rough time this 
month. "Well, "Frank said, "she always does when she doesn't have the sessions. " This got Jane thinking, I could see. Both of us have had the thought 
at times, but Frank's spontaneous remark hit the mark just right. 
(I asked Jane if she thought the sessions served as a balance to those 
sinful-self, very restrictive ideas — that when she gave up on the sessions 
tha t other self was free to exert its power and beliefs. She didn't know, bu t I 
thought it a valid idea. I added that the ivhole bit put me on the spot, and 
always had, because I was never sure whether to insist that she have the sessions, or forget them. I'd always been cautious about asking her to keep 
holding them, for fear that they might come to dominate her life. It would be 
ironic indeed if it develops that the "truth" is more the other way around. It 
even appears to me right now, at least, that that more damaging avoidance 
of sessions has had a very nega tive impact. 
("Get out your stuff "Jane said after Td tolcl her about Frank's remark and 
we had discussed it a little. She lay high up on the bed, her head back against 
her pillows. Her Seth voice was both strained and strong, I thought, although 
she had no trouble with the ivords. Her voice was different, though, and the 
rhythm was distinctly different than usual; she paused every few words.) 
The sessions, like life itself, have been and are a gift, rising from 
the immense, never-ending creativity of existence. 
NIRVANA. RIGHT IS MIGHT 
• 329 • 
Alone, they carry within themselves the splendor of unknown 
knowledge, and they arise from the deep founts of Ruburt's life, containing within themselves the neighborhood and world in which he 
grew, the power and vitality of the people he knew, the resourcefulness and energy that composed reality. Hidden within the sessions 
there is the splendid vitality of Father Trenton, his (Jane's) mother, 
his neighbors and teachers — but beyond that the sessions connect 
and unite the annals of existence as he has experienced them, so 
that in speaking with my voice, and for me (quavering), he expresses 
the blessed vitality and acknowledgments of the universe, as even 
through the sessions the sweet universe acknowledges his own presence and being. And the two of you together also live within one life 
that expresses multitudinous voices, and sheds its own mercy, gladness, and joy, out into the world at large, enriching it, renewing the 
springtimes, and never truly ending. 
Let us, then, continue. 
(4:02 P.M. "That's it, "Jane said. "I don't know what he meant by the 
*Let us continue," but that's the last sentence I got. I don't know — I 
couldn't tell whether it was a hello or a 
goodbye..." 
(I read the session to her. "Well, I'd say it can be any thing you want it 
to be." 
(She nodded. "I feel so weird I don 'l know what to do." 
("That may be a good sign — a sign of change. Let me know what you 
want to do." 
(Jane said she felt "scared and panicky," and that, I knew, was a good 
sign. I told her we'd touched something that needed dragging out into the 
open. Before I could try any thing like free association, however, Jane said 
she hacl more to give. 
(4:10.) To one extent or another, Ruburt then speaks in the sessions for all peoples, for the united psyches that overflow with thoughts 
and feelings that are registered by the wind, giving voice to the private, intimate, yet connected lives of men and women throughout the 
centuries — so that many people, listening to or reading the sessions, 
hear their own inner voices also, and feel the contours of their own 
natures, and universal nature as well. 
("Thai's all," she saicl at 4:14.1 made notes and helped her have a cigarette until it was time to get ready to turn her at 4:30. 
• 330 • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
(I felt some small glimmers of hope about our progress this afternoon, 
and of course, hope it continues. Perhaps sessions will help Jane. I also mentioned several times that I'd like to have her return to the house. "But not to 
the bed there," I said, referring to the hospital bed we own. "I don't mean 
that at all I mean I want to see you getting around somewhat, at least") 
AUGUST 
1984 
3:13 RM. WEDNESDAY 
(Today Jane looked and acted somewhat better, following our talks and 
actions yesterday. I brought in the sessions for February 5 and 6, and read 
them to her after lunch. I selected them at random this morning, but picked 
just those I wanted, for their import is that Jane has no disease, as Seth has 
insisted all along. In other words, I told Jane, she doesn'I have to surmount 
any physical debilitating disease that has bacteria or germs or microbes 
attached to it, and is labeled "incurable." 
(The sessions also stressed her fears of being attacked by the world if she 
used her abilities. Td had them too, but they are much minimized by now for 
me, and I ivant her to reach that belief plateau also. I know she can, I told 
her, and that it's vital for her if she wants to live. After all, hardly anything 
else could be worse in life than being attacked by her symptoms, so what's 
there to lose? 
(The session for February 5 even stressed that the same energy that 
healed her right leg could also straighten it I tried to go easy with what I 
said to her today, but ended up fearing I had overdone it in my eagerness to 
get things started. I thought Jane might get confused, being bombarded with 
so many ideas and suggestions from so many angles. 
(She did agree to try for a session, however, even though I thought she 
didn 'tfeel up to it Td mentioned her doing so, so as to help her use her creative abilities, since they are so much a part of her, whereas in times before 
Td thought of asking her not to use those same abilities because I felt they 
were making her worse. I think that now I've learned — and hope to help 
teach Jane — that there's nothing for it but to use one's abilities full blast 
in every area — and that that resolve and action will conquer all and set 
her free — physically, creatively, and mentally. 
(She lay back upon her bed and pillow, half crying at times, speaking 
with a choked voice often, and once again with a different rhythm — one 
broken by long pauses every few words, as yesterday.) 
NIRVANA. RIGHT IS MIGHT 
• 331 • 
I bid you (half crying) a most fond and sympathetic afternoon. 
("Thank you, Seth. The same to you. * 
(Long pause.) Ruburt is not going to die now, to the best of my 
knowledge. 
He is still gathering up his resources, and became quite panicstricken at the situation in general. He is still working toward recovery, 
though the fear and panic did slow down that recovery considerably — and by recovery I mean simply the return to conditions just 
before this recent hang-up. 
(Delivery often strange, choked with emotion, long pauses.) 
The thyroid medication will benefit, and I believe the food situation will slowly return to the period previously. 
Let him take a break, and perhaps we can return briefly. 
(3:21 Jane was again half crying. She felt panicky, which meant we 
were close to something. I asked her what it might be, but she didn't answer 
enough for me to pursue the subject. 
("It'll take me a minute to get back to it." 
("Okay." Word by careful word: 
(3:27.) The session itself should reassure him enough to allow 
some of the panic to subside, so that he can begin to sense at least some 
return of composure. You have indeed been of invaluable support now. 
(Jane lay so quietly, eyes closed, head tipping toward her left on her 
pillow, mouth open, that I thought she'd fallen asleep.) 
Avoid what-is-wrong issues. Imperative. 
(Longpause.) Instead, have him try to sense the rightness that still 
works within him. That rightness can then help dissolve or circumnavigate those other elements. 
I bid you a hopeful good afternoon. 
("Thank you." 
(3:36 P.M. Jane asked me to read the session to her, and tell her what I 
thought of it. I said it was very good indeed —just what I'd expected and 
hoped for. It showed a resurgence of hope, that all ivas not lost. Jane wasn't 
so sure about the recovery, but I said I thought I'd seen signs of that the last 
few days, and now felt it would happen. Her appetite was sloivly improving. 
Her arms and hands rest easier, and overall she seems a little more relaxed. 
I want to try more suggestion, like I'd done yesterday. I told Jane I realized 
it would be tougher for her to realize these things, but that I thought events 
would prove them out. 
• 332 • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
(I had her lay on her side ivhile I checked TV, got supper ready, and so 
forth. I left at 7:15. Her vitals had been okay — 98.5,1 believe. No prayer 
was said. Have a good night, sweetheart.) 
AUGUST 2,1984 
3:21 P.M. THURSDAY 
(Jane didn't call last night. She said that after I left her at 7:15 or so 
last night, following all the events of the clay, she "passed out " and slept 
well for 2V2 hours. She wasn't so comfortable later, though. She went to 
hydro this morning. Pain. Later in 330 she had to call for help because she 
couldn't work the nurses' call button, and one of the nurses hollered at her. 
Georgia then came to help. 
(I ivas disappointed that Jane ate so little for lunch today. I had started 
feeling tired when 1 got to 330,- so decided not to press any points. Maybe, I 
thought, we needed time to recover from the emotions of the last few days 
especially. I also felt that Jane's destiny was in her own hands, and that 
nothing anyone else was going to do would change that. So it is with each 
of us. Her recovery was up to her, then, although I still puzzled why she carried her situation to such extremes when she said she didn't want to die. 
(Jane dictated this poem from 3:00-3:06. 
Each woman, child and man 
is anonymous as 
we all are, 
yet each is secretly named 
as a royal brother and sister 
of nature's kingdom. 
We are saluted by the wind 
and acknowledged by stars 
as members of a family 
of eternal guise. 
(I read the poem to her at her request. Sometimes she doesn't want to 
hear them. She told me about a vivid dream she had last night, and I refer 
to an in terpretation of the dream at the end of the session. 
(Then I read her the Seth part of yesterday's session, but not my notes. 
Jane saicl she felt a little better today generally, and I thought she acted it. 
"I don't know if I'll have a session today or not," she said, "but keep your 
NIRVANA. RIGHT IS MIGHT 
• 333 • 
paper and pen handy." And then she immediately began the session. Her 
words were loaded with emotion, more evenly delivered than yesterday's session had been, yet still the rhythm wasn't one of ease and speed. 
(I was surprised that she had a session at all, figuring she might want 
to relax more today.) 
I bid you a sympathetic, yet hopeful good afternoon. 
(aGood afternoon.") 
Let Ruburt remind himself that his birth was not responsible 
for his mother's incapacity. He did not rob her of her own life by 
being born. 
(In no time at allJane's Seth voice had moved closer and closer to tears.) 
He has no reason (long pause) to feel guilty, or to punish himself 
for his mother's situation. He did not murder her in any way by his 
birth. He is, therefore, no murderer or destroyer, or contemptible. 
He is not his mother's murderer, then, in any fashion, nor responsible for the breakup of his parents' marriage. 
He has no such crime, or crimes, to repent of, or to punish himself for. He is not therefore an unnatural daughter of the earth. 
Take a break. 
(3:27. The tears were streaming down Jane's face as she came out of the 
session, and their flow increased as she cried more and more. She'd delivered her words in almost a grand sepulchral manner by the break. She 
sobbed, her face wet, her mouth contorted. 
("Is that what this has been all about?" I asked, meaning the years of 
the symptoms. She didn't answer. I thought it was great that she was 
expressing deeply-felt emotion, just as I was surprised that she'd spontaneously — seemingly — chosen the subject matter for the session . . . This 
had to be good, I said. 
("I always tried to buy her things to make up, "Jane cried, her whole 
face twisted with tearful emotion. "I do not know whether she haled me or 
not. I guess she haled me." 
("Well," I saicl several times, wherever she is now, I sure hope your 
mother understands what she did to you. I groped for words to express my 
anger, for watching my wife cry certainly aroused strong feelings within me. 
I felt like directing some very nasty barbs at Marie — especially when I 
remembered those old photos of Jane that I'd looked at a couple of days ago. 
Hoiv coulcl a three-year-old child, standing in the snow on Middle Avenue 
in Saratoga Springs, be responsible for hurting anything — or anybody ? 
• 334 • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
(I tried to reassure her several times. "You ve never hurt anybody, sweetheart — " 
(Wouldn't you know it — at a time like this Carla came in to do Jane's 
vitals. As long as she was there, I asked Carla to get someone to clean out 
Jane's ears, for she'd been having difficulty hearing again lately. 
(Carla hadn 'I been gone a minute when another nurse came in, and 
said she'd do Jane's ears a little later. I said fine. 
(Jane wasn 'I crying by now, but her reddened eyes and face must have been 
revealing, though no one said anything. "You never hurt anyone," I saicl 
again. "I don't know what I'm trying to say." I held my tongue instead of 
cursing Marie, as I wanted to. "I'd better shut up, I guess, before I say more." 
(3:47. Crying somewhat again, Jane resumed the session. I had to ask 
her to repeat some words. She lay back with her eyes closed most of the time.) 
Tell Ruburt he is in no way responsible for killing his grandmother or the housekeeper.There is, therefore, in those regards, no cause for self-punishment or penance (crying), or turmoil. He is therefore not damned in 
any manner — neither by God or nature, and there is no reason for 
him to damn himself. He is therefore innocent, and pronounced so. 
(3:50. A nurse's aide brought in Jane's vitamins. Then another one came 
in to say hello and talk about the rain we were getting in spurts. "If any 
more of those kids come in Til scream, "Jane said when they 'd left. But they 're 
all great people and a joy to see and depend upon, and obviously they like us. 
(I read the session since break to Jane. "More," she said at 3:56. Her 
delivery ivas calmer now, more even.) 
There is no reason either, to blame his mother, or to hold any 
grudge against her, for in no way did Marie understand the issues. 
(Long pause, eyes closed.) Such attitudes and dire misinterpretations often occur as mistakes in reading life, as if you insert an extra 
vowel or syllable that does not belong, but change the interpretation 
of an entire passage. Let the mistake, then, be erased. 
(Longpause at 4:01. "Iguess that's it. . . * 
(Not very long after the end of the session, Jane began making motions 
with both arms, raising them up from her body and rotating them. Her feet 
and toes also moved, and her head a little. The motions were reminiscent, 
on a smaller scale, of those she'd begun doing in October 1983, but eventually gave up on. 
NIRVANA. RIGHT IS MIGHT 
• 335 • 
("What are you doing?" I asked. "Showing off?" 
(Jane didn 't answer. With her mouth closed tigh t she was making grun ting and keening sounds as she moved her body, over and over, expressing 
vocally the same efforts she was making physically. These motions too were 
a definite response to new freedom, ancl I reminded her that Seth had said 
earlier this year that once it's allowed to, the physical body will begin 
responding immediately. This was certainly a sign of that, I said, and something I hadn 't even thought of. The session and the motions certainly did 
signal new things. 
(When I asked her, Jane saicl today 's session and motions could be interpreted as being related to her dream for last night. She9cl clreamecl that once 
certain things, events, were set into motion, they inevitably would continue 
in their motion until they came true — then the world would end. "Well,99 
she said, "if I find out those things aren 9t true, then the world isn 'I going to 
end." I said this seemed like a symbolic statement, the dream, that old beliefs 
meant she had no hope of extricating herself from a foregone conclusion. 
But if those events between Jane and Marie didn't have to move on toward 
their inevitable end, as staled in the session today, then there was hope. 
(This didn't mean that I didn't still feel bitterness toward Marie. Even 
if she didn't grasp the issues involved, as Seth said, did this give her the 
freedom to so abuse another? A large subject, I know, ancl one chosen by all 
involved, but still. . . 
(After supper, Jane once again embarked upon a series of movements of 
her arms and hands especially. Other parts of her body were also responding — it was as if once it understood that it ivere set free, it would try to 
move as best it could right away. Most heartening, Jane, ancl keep it up. 
Great things can happen! 
(Carla called for Jane at 9:30, and told me that Jane was again doing 
those motions. My wife was already plunging in, then. Fine.) 
AUGUST 3,1984 
2:59 P.M. FRIDAY 
(Jane looked a bit more at ease when 1 got to 330. "Don 'I touch me," she 
saicl as she lay on her back watching the TV soap opera, The Young and 
the Restless, as she did every noontime. "Ijust want to lay here ancl let the 
Darvoset lake effect. . ." 
• 336 • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
(She ate a rather skimpy lunch. At 2:59, as we talked, she began to 
speak about being scared and panicky again. Half crying and moaning in 
no time, arms and hands moving from where I'd propped them up. She did 
say her panicky feelings had to do with the session about her mother Marie 
yesterday, and a dream she'd had last night. Very good, I said, but she 
couldn't actually pin down the source or subject matter for her panic today. 
She continued half crying. "Read me — read me yesterday 's session. I don 't 
know what I'm doing," she cried, when I asked her if she was thinking 
about Marie. 
(I read her the session at 2:48. Jane ivas moaning and crying. She 
didn't want to hear my notes for the session, or the poem she'd dictated yesterday. I thought it important that she hear the notes, but had no choice 
except to wait. 
(Tearfully, moaning, at 2:58: "I'm going to try, Rob, to have a session. 
I'll do the best I can . . . I don't know if I can . . . All right, I'll try." Then, 
teary, with many pauses, eyes open most of the time:) 
To live does not require any monumental effort. 
He will not die, despite himself, so to speak. His living is the most 
natural thing in the world. He is, therefore, not abandoned. The 
mysterious, creative healing energies do sustain him. Forget the 
knees as much as possible, and the seeming impediments. 
(Very long pause.) The body's motion already begins to assert itself. 
Let him find that motion. Above all, reassure him, and feel its presence. Again, the session should automatically help calm his mind and 
let the panic dissipate. 
We will return. 
("Okay for now, "Jane said. 
(3:03. She was still teary, her voice often choked with emotion. She took 
the Darvoset to help calm her down. It ivas raining heavily, just as it had 
done periodically yesterday afternoon. Reading today's session, so far, 
helped. Carla had said last night ivhen she called that Jane was still doing 
the motions she'd begun yesterday. Now Jane told me a friend had visited 
earlier. When the motions had started up, Jane had asked her to leave, since 
she hadn't wanted to do the motions in front of someone else. 
("Right now, "Jane said, "the fear seems to be that despite myself 1'm 
going to die." 
("That's okay," I said. "It's just another fear. Just don't hide it. It'll go 
NIRVANA. RIGHT IS MIGHT 
• 337 • 
away. But it shows how far things have gone — that it's time to back off 
from the point of death." 
(Jane had a cigarette. I told her it was important that I read her my 
notes for yesterday's session, especially those pertaining to her mother. She 
finally agreed. 
(3:14.1 read the notes. Then 1 read the session forJuly 30 — at Jane's 
request — the first in this series regarding her death, the end of The Way 
Toward Health, and so forth. I tried to put the situation in perspective: 
"You're trying to excise your fears of your mother, which in turn led to your 
being afraid of the world and your own fears of death, 'cause you carried 
your idea of protection from the world so far. . ." 
now.) (3:30. "A little more session, "Jane said. Her delivery ivas much calmer 
Remind Ruburt further (pause) that he did his best to help your 
mother, making efforts toward love and communication (longpause) 
that he felt you were not able to express toward your mother at times. 
Remind him of his kindnesses to your apartment-house neighbor, 
Miss Callahan, to his many students, and of his love for you. Also 
remind him that he did not deal with malice toward his own mother. 
Do remind him affectionately and often that for many years he loved 
his mother deeply, and that his own existence made his grandfather 
experience a love that was a light in his later years. 
These elements are all living and highly potent in the affairs of 
his life — so that in no way do his relationships with his mother 
(pause) become any isolated concentration, existing apart from the 
other affairs of life. Remind him that Ruburt loves nature, and always 
has. Nature loves Ruburt. ancl always has. 
It may also be a good idea to read some portions of our late material over, substituting the name Jane rather than Ruburt. He is Jane 
to himself and to the universe and to you, and to his friends and his 
readers. 
("Okay, "Jane said at 3:40. 
(We were talking at 3:45 when the phone rang. It wasJohn Bumbalo. His 
father,Joe, had died at 2:00 P.M. John had just left the house, 
asjaneandlhad 
left the rest home just before my mother died in November, 1973. Jane spoke to 
John, thanking him for looking after me. John told her I was "a wonderful 
man." Ifelt a surge of emotion, half unbelieving, when she told me. Jane began 
• 338 • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
to hum a song we bo th knew bu t couldn 't place — perhaps an aria from an 
Italian or Spanish opera. She said she thought it was connected to Joe somehow. 
(After a late supper I went over to see the Bumbalo family. Margaret 
and I hugged. She almost cried. I could tell they'd all been crying. Yet they 
had the Olympics on TV, and John offered me a scotch and soda. There was 
much laughing and joking too. Margaret asked me if Td be an honorary 
pallbearer at Joe's funeral, and I said sure. She said I didn't have to do anything. The first thought that crossed my mind was that I didn 'I have a suit 
to wear —just my corduroys. I didn't mention this. 
(I did no typing last night, but typed this session this morning after 
taking our cat, Billy, around the house on his morning jaunt. The phone 
rang at 10:25. It was Georgia. She put Jane on. "No big deal," my wife 
said, "but I had a crappy night. Would you come down earlier and maybe 
eat lunch with meV' 
(Georgia said she'd order me a colcl ham plate, and Jane and I made 
arrangements that 1'd get there at noon — earlier wasn't necessary, she 
said. Jane wasn't going to hydro this morning, and Georgia was starting to 
bathe her in bed. 
(This is the first time my wife has ever asked me to come at a different 
hour. I see it as a good thing, since I'd told her to do so, and that it may 
serve as excellent therapy and reinforcement of new beliefs.) 
AUGUST 4,1984 
3:00 RM. SATURDAY 
(I got to 330 at 12:05, just as Jane was taking her Darvoset. She didn't 
feel very good, but seemed to improve a bit later. When the lunch tray 
came, along with the cold ham plate Georgia had ordered for me, I wasn't 
hungry. Jane also ate little, except for several cups of iced chocolate milk. I 
guess I got depressed when I saw that once again she just wasn't going to 
eat much. 
(At 2:30 Jane began having panic attacks, just as she's been doing 
lately. Crying and moaning. She again could not tell me what their source 
was, although we were pretty sure the same things were involved — mostly 
her mother. I cleaned her close-up glasses for her and told her to put them on 
when she resisted. Then I told her to read yesterday's session as I held it for 
her. Something she wouldn't have done if I hadn't insisted. First she read 
the Seth material in the session, then the notes at my insistence. 
NIRVANA. RIGHT IS MIGHT 
• 339 • 
("I guess I've let the fear get into everything," she said, tearfully. 
(I too was upset and half angry. "You sure have," 7 SAID. "You 've let it 
rule every bit of your life, every thought almost, and there sure isn 7 much 
left, is there ?" 
(Her panic didn 7 last nearly as long as it hacl yesterday, and I hoped her 
con tinued experience of it would lead to its dissipa tion. She repealed several 
times between sniffles that she'd try to have a session. "I'll do the best I can.") 
Start again, slowly. 
Tell Ruburt to tell himself that he can slowly but definitely make 
small adjustments in his thinking, feeling, belief — that even despite 
his panic he can feel those changes move around in his psyche. 
Remind him that all his nature does indeed work to his benefit, 
and that signs of creative alterations and feeling begin to surface, 
like tiny shoots. 
Again, he is not abandoned. He is in no way responsible for his 
mother's problems, and no matter how strong his fears, universal 
energy lifts him up regardless of all else. The session does automatically add its own sense of infinite devotedness by gathering together 
the healing abilities, which have their own soothing effect. 
Sometimes it is not the words but the very sounds of the sessions 
which transfer calmness by directly affecting the body itself also. 
The entire situation not only is temporary, but already has made 
its own turnabout, restoring the body and mind to an important 
degree. 
(3:14.1 read the session to Jane at her reques t. I hardly felt like it. I'd 
sensed anger again as the session progressed. I wondered what good it 
would clo. Probably my own attitude and mood today, of course — yet the 
session could have been any one of a similar kind that Jane had given in 
the last ten years. And in all of those others she'd been in better shape to 
begin with — and still nothing had happened! 
(I must have reached the point where I truly don 7 think she wants anything but what she's got — for after all, doesn't each of us create our own 
reality? And what's my part in all of this? Without doubt, my own frustrations and resentments were surfacing probably for my own safety. 
(Jane seemed to feel and speak much better after the session. She went 
through another period of moving her arms and hands, ancl feet to a lesser 
extent, as I turned her at 4:30. I couldn't help but tell myself I'd seen the 
same thing many times before, without lasting results. 
• 340 • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
(Carla helped Jane call me at 9:05 P.M., just as I was finishing this session. She sounded fairly good. We exchanged words of love for each other.) 
AUGUST 5,1984 
4:09 RM. SUNDAY 
(I was eating breakfast at 7:50 when I received a call from the hospital. 
The call scared me at that hour. The nurse said Jane wasn 'I good. They 
couldn't get her comfortable, she wasn't eating breakfast, and she wanted 
me to come down. Jan was to tell Jane at once ifl'd see her. I left the breakfast, the cats, the house, turned off the lights, and drove down. I didn't 
think it was a life-or-death crisis, but the result of our conversations lately, 
and the sessions, the panic attacks, and so forth. It was raining heavily 
when I left the house. 
(Jane was uncomfortableup 
to her shoulders on two full chucks, 
propped and wedged so she couldn 'I move. I had two nurses hold her up 
while I got rid of the chucks. We got her positioned much more comfortably. 
Jane cried at limes, but not excessively. She'd had Darvoset before I arrived. 
Actually, I felt her upset was another good sign. 
(In fact, after a while I got my ivife to resume eating breakfast. She did 
quite well, taking chocolate milk, coffee, a slice of toast cincl jelly, several 
bites of egg and bacon. My presence undoubtedly helped her resume eating. 
(She had periodic bou ts of panic as she a te, and we talked these out to 
some extent. I asked her to just not bury the feelings, and I don't think she 
did. Jane came up with several excellent insights. One of them is that she 
may have associated punishment with physical motion — this idea stemming from her days at the Catholic home, where the youngsters were made to 
kneel for long periods of time as punishment for various "wrongs." This 
came to Jane's consciousness as we watched a very creative skit on the TV 
program Sesame Street. I'd never heard her make this connection before. 
(Another insight is that "the body has it's own rights." Seth has said 
this many times, as have I, but it evidently hadn't meant all that much to 
Jane before. 
(At one time during breakfast when she became upset and panicky 
again, I repeated my use of suggestion/mild hypnosis as I had the other day. 
Again, results were good. Jane stared at me intently as I spoke each word. 
(I told her about Joe Bumbalo's obituary notice that 1'd found 
in 
NIRVANA. RIGHT IS MIGHT 
• 341 • 
yesterday's paper, and that after I left 330 tonight I'd stop at the funeral 
home to see Joe and the family. Also, that I'd be going to the funeral tomorrow morning. 
(One of the new nurses had her 20th birthday today. Staff had a party 
and lots of goodies to eat, so a nurse put together more food farJane and me. 
Jane ale fairly well She also felt instances of the panic, though, having to 
do with her mother and family events, and we talked those out 
(I hadn't realized that her grandfather, Joseph 
Burdo—"Little 
Daddy," as Jane had called him — had spent a couple of years in a hospital for TB when Jane had been around ten years old. I also understood as 
we talked that when Jane's grandfather had wanted to move out of the house 
on Middle Avenue, he had sold all the furniture and had the utilities 
turned off Marie then succeeded in thwarting his plans and banned him 
from the house. To Jane this had seemed like a second divorce in the family. 
This hurt the six-year old girl. Her parents had divorced when she was 3. 
(Jane cried as she told me things I hadn't heard before. I said she had 
to put the past in its place if ever she ivas to be free. She came up with a 
number of memories new to me — like going to the youth center on Saratoga 
Springs' lower Broadway on weekend evenings to dance and socialize, and 
so forth. She cited many things she'd enjoyed doing very much — running, 
skating, dancing, and just sheer walking for the fun of it. Even then she 
had loved nature. 
(I was pleased. In view of all of those early enjoyable events she'd had, 
I suggested she try focusing on them in times of stress, instead of the negative ones we usually talk about. All in all, I think we learned a great deal, 
and that we hacl hope after all, in contrast to my mood yesterday. 
(When I asked her if she wanted to have a session, she saicl in surprise 
that she had no idea for one, and was hardly ready or in the mood. I saicl 
she didn't have to. She was obviously getting restless and had been on her 
back long enough. But almost at once Jane began a session after all. She 
spoke slowly, eyes closed often, her voice still uneven and very emotional at 
times, even quavering.) 
Once again, your help has been invaluable, rising also from a 
new sense of peace and power that is emerging in your psyche. 
Those energies are coming to Ruburt's aid now. (Longpause.) The 
feelings of abandonment are being expressed. This is a therapeutic 
measure that will make way for healings, comfort and reassurance, by 
• 342 • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
his putting together material in different fashions, rearranging experience, turning thoughts inside out. 
(Very long pause at 4:20.) In many, even most upsetting experiences, there has been a resourceful power. Ruburt is now beginning 
to clear the way for expression again. More than the session words 
are important (delivery very uneven), for underriding those, the healing energy is being translated in other ways. 
He should remind himself to look for new signs, however small, 
of a new ease, for those signs will indeed now be making themselves 
known. 
I bid you a most sympathetic and supportive afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth. Thank you very much." 
(4:24 P.M. "I had to s top several times because of bladder spasms," Jane 
said, which helped account for her uneven delivery. She said that at the 
same time she'd felt panicky a couple of limes, and she'd had a very catchy, 
well-known tune running through her head. "I don't know," she said. "I 
guess I was getting from Seth: \Ruburt will make out okay in hydro,' because 
it's something I've been dreading." 
(Jane didn't eat much for supper, which seemed okay. I was getting 
tired. I left at 7:15 and drove to the funeral home. I felt self-conscious about 
my blue jeans and shoes. Td left the house so early and quickly I hadn't had 
time to plan for anything to wear more formally. I carried with me the jacket 
I usually wear when I nap at 330 — it looked a bit more presentable. 
(Bu t I soon discovered at the funeral home that it mattered not; people 
wore anything. I met John, Margaret, and others there, and signed a guest 
book. Joe lay in a deep crimson casket. I told John that he really did look 
peaceful, as at no other lime in his life. It was the same feeling 1'd had staring at my parents in their respective caskets. People laughed and joked. I 
told John I expected to attend the service tomorrow at the funeral home, that 
I was willing to be an honorary pallbearer, providing the times worked out. 
They all understood, since they knew Td been at the hospital all day. I don'i 
think 1'd better consider being late to 330, after today's events. I told the 
Bumbalos I'd call if any thing came up early in the day. John said they have 
enough food to feed me for a iveek, after it's all over. Life goes on, even in 
our reality. 
(I expected a call from Carla and Jane as I typed this, but none has 
come through as I finish this session at 9:55 P.M. Sleep well, Jane.) 
NIRVANA. RIGHT IS MIGHT 
• 343 • 
AUGUST 7,1984 
4:05 P.M. TUESDAY 
(Here are the notes for activities of Monday, August 6: 
(This morning I was dressed to go to Joe Bumbalo'sfuneral by 9:15.1 
didn't feel like hanging around the house until 9:45 — the service was at 
10:00 — so I told Margaret Bumbalo I'd run down to the hospital to see 
Jane first, then walk over. Jane was better, surprised to see me, trying to 
decide whether to go to hydro [she didn't]. 
(I ivas one of six honorary pallbearers. We stood outside after the service, three in a row facing each other on the porch, while six others carried 
Joe's casket between us ancl down the steps to the hearse. 
(Ifound the whole funeral experience quite interesting, though I understood little of what was going on. A priest gave a short talk at the funeral 
home, leading it o f f , maybe for shock value, by telling us that sooner or later 
every one of us would experience the same thing Joe Bumbalo had. The room 
was very impressive, with its beamed ceiling. I thought the timeless quality, 
of light and so forth, inside the large room where the casket lay was more 
than a little symbolic in itself, isolated as the room was from the apparent 
time of day, night, or season. 
(I could see how each move of the burial process had been carefully 
evolved to help the bereaved family separate from the one who hacl died. 
After all, the process had been refined through the centuries. 
(The priest in charge — there were three of them — said that Joe had 
planned much of the service himself, and that Joe had asked him: "Why are 
the good ones taken?" The priest enlarged the question to: "Why is anyone 
taken?" 
(Booklets titled wThe Catholic Burial Rite" were handed out as we 
entered the church, ancl I kept my copy. After trying to stuff it into jacket 
pockets during the service, I finally ended up carrying it out with me quite 
openly. Nobody challenged me, asking for its return. I wanted to show it 
to Jane. 
(The booklet explains much — all of the multitude of sittings and 
standings and kneelings that we went through in the pews; the gifts carried 
to the altar by the Bumbalo grandchildren; the hymns we listened to; the 
selections from the Bible read by the various priests; the responses we gave to 
the appropriate passages recited by the head priest, who read from the Gospel 
of John and other Biblical passages. 
• 344 • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
(It was all part of the ritual, Jane saicl later as we wen t over the booklet 
together in 330. Only now she was surprised to see that it was printed all 
in English. In her day it had been printed in Latin on one page, with the 
English translation on the page opposite. The new way seemed very strange 
to her,; 
(The service wasn't as long as I'd thought it might be, though, and 
we were on our way to the cemetery shortly before noon, winding through 
the quiet tree-lined side streets. The day had turned hot and bright 
and humid — a beautiful day to be alive, actually, though I'd agreed 
with the priests when each of them said that Joe was in an even better 
place now. 
(Perhaps 20-25 people ivere at graveside, compared to the much larger 
group at the church. The priests spoke briefly. They were perfectly sincere 
people, and I found it arresting to listen to them as they spoke of Jesus 
Christ, the afterlife, and so forth, with such utter sincerity and conviction. 
Their commitment was for life, I though t, and so was bound to be different 
than most other people's. I ivondered how often they went through roughly 
the same procedures ivith the dead, and speculated about how their sincerity 
and love must have stood them in good stead at such often-repeated times. 
Far each time, they had to ring true to those left behind, adding those necessary personal touches, and references and little stories, to match the personal history of the newly deceased. 
(I didn't stay for the lowering of the casket. I don't know whether the 
immediate family did or not. John Bumbalo had made arrangements for 
someone to give me a ride back to the hospital, where my car was. Jane and 
I went over the booklet of burial rites after lunch. I felt peaceful and tired, 
and put off starting these notes for a long time. 
(At the funeral home a friend had told me he didn't know how Jane 
and I stood it after all this time. I said you either rose to the occasion or you 
didn't. He agreed, and offered to help us in any way he could, which I told 
him I appreciated very much. I do.) 
u 
(August 7, 1984. Patty called me at noon and said Jane wanted me to 
come to 330 early if I could. I finished a sandivich and went down. She was 
doing fairly well by then, but had had a very rough morning. She'd gone to 
hydro, and hadn't fared too well: new people, students, had helped position 
NIRVANA. RIGHT IS MIGHT 
• 345 • 
her, and hadn 't done it right Jane said she'd had a much better night than 
usual, though. 
(I'd told her several times in recent days that I thought her right knee 
was draining considerably less as a rule, and that several other scabs on her 
body were showing signs of clearing up. The swelling on her left shoulder 
blade varies considerably in size from day to day. 
(I was pretty quiet today, mostly because I fell tired and didn't know 
what else to do to try to get her to eat or be more open about physical motion. 
So I said nothing, feeling very frustrated. Jane ate little lunch, though she 
said she did better with breakfast I decided to slop saying anything about 
either hydro or her eating, since it appeared to have no effect 
(I didn 'I expect her to have a session. When she did, her voice was quite 
uneven; she spoke with many pauses, at times in a peculiar pronunciation 
that I had trouble understanding. Eyes often closed.) 
Do not take it for granted that the hydro situation has the worst 
connotations. 
The knee material (drainage) is drying up from beneath (long 
pause), and that is also part of the therapeutic process. Motion is being 
redistributed, but faith in the process is again immensely important. 
I will try to return (long pause), and portions of Ruburt's evening 
last night were considerably improved — that is, more peaceful. 
(4:11.1 read the session to Jane. Resume briefly, at 4:26:) 
Again, the session itself will help promote the mind and body's 
sense of ease and comfort. I bid you then a supportive good evening. 
("Thank you." 4:27 P.M. Jane ate very little for supper— then she 
threw it all up, so ended up ivithoutfood since noon. I was frustrated and 
discouraged. She just will not eat She called at 9:15 with Carta's help. She 
said something about she should eat something before the night passes. I 
don't knoto how she's going to manage that. I didn't ask.) 
AUGUST 8,1984 
2:15 RM. WEDNESDAY 
(No session was held today, but I want to present a mix of poetry and 
notes. 
(Jane ate little lunch. 1 didn't urge her to, or ask questions about hydro 
or anything else. She dictated the following poem from 2:15-2:28 P.M.) 
• 346 • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
High in the secret mountains 
ivhere the proclamations 
of nature comey 
I sense a new note full and free 
as a whole new world in some 
ancient sweet recipe. 
The ingredients are 
glittering and golden and bright 
and filled with expectancy, 
and that note swirls 
curled inside nature's world 
with the promise a salute, 
a new book to emerge 
up in the mountains 
where the earth's 
proclamations are made. 
And there is a wind, 
a rush and a power and the voice, 
a voice that says nothing at all 
yet forms new alphabets of life 
that glitter and buzz and swarm 
and shoo t in to fragmen ts, 
jigsaws of light, sweet bombs 
of mystery that go shooting off 
like seeds of flame, 
with a fury and a power 
and a secret 
known to me alone. 
(Then at 2:33-2:37 P.M.) 
There are Mondays 
stuck into comers 
where children threw them 
ages ago, so I gathered 
them up and washed them out 
and hung them up to dry. 
NIRVANA. RIGHT IS MIGHT 
• 347 • 
The time winds quickly 
dry them out 
so they flap in the 
new morning sun, 
cosmic laundry. 
(One of the firs t things I learned when I go t to 330 today was that Jeff 
Karder had increased Jane's dosage of Darvoset to every two hours instead 
of three. Jane finally told me that she'd had a very rough morning> although 
during the night she'd mostly done rather well 
(Her talk veered around to the fact that once again she said she was 
thinking of dying — in her sleep, maybe — in order to get some peace of 
mind, and to give me some. The pain is really bothering her at times. She 
talked about how she'd loved life, and the great times we'd had before she got 
sick, and even after that for a long while. She also said she was surprised 
her life was ending at such an early age. She told me I'd have a great life 
after her death, and be free myself 
(She said all of this in that matter-of-fact voice she'd used the last time, 
that she'd told me similar things about her death, before Seth had said very 
recently that she wasn't going to die now, no matter what she thought or 
said. I kept that in mind. Yet here she was, treating the possibility of death 
quite seriously again. 
(The swelling on her shoulder was up again, but I noticed there was no 
drainage at all from her knee, nor was there for the rest of the afternoon. 
Jane said she'd been picturing herself at the old apartments on Water Street 
[we'd ended up with two], ancl around town as she used to go — all as 
though she were taking the last grand tour. When she was finished with all 
of this she asked me what I thought. I said I didn't have any thing to say. I 
no longer carry on like I used to, or get mad, ancl so forth. I could hardly 
make her do something she dicln 'I want to do, but I didn't say that either. If 
she wanted to die that was it. The hell with it, I thought. I decided — 
again — that I ivas through worrying about whether she'd live or die, or 
whether she was starving herself to dea th, or whatever. 
(Some interesting developments occurred as I prepared to rub her legs 
with Oil of Olay, as I always do before turning her on her side. When I 
pressed the main tendon/ligament under her left knee, I found it as taut 
and strong as steel — as usual But the next second it suddenly gave way 
very flexibly. Beneath my hands it seemed to turn to rubber. Jane cried out 
• 348 • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
in surprise. Her leg began to quiver and the foot also moved. So did her 
head and shoulders as I massaged the leg for some while. Surprise: Seth had 
said her body had begun to turn itself around. 
(I found the same relative situation with the right leg. As 1 cautiously 
massaged it, it too began to move, including the foot, and the head and 
shoulders. Jane cried again, and kept on making a series of low moaning 
sounds, eyes closed, as I worked loith the leg. I could tell she was both afraid 
of my touch, that it hurl, and that she hadn't expected the response in the 
leg or the motion. 
(I told her I didn 't want to overdo it, so I turned her on her side. After 
my nap, I turned her back. As 1 propped her left leg with the pillow, I discovered that it would still move, for the tendons were still soft. At the same 
time Jane was in pain — natural enough, I said — for according to conventional belief, muscles that hadn 't been used were supposed to hurt. I also 
let loose with a few barbed comments, to the effect that she luasn't about to 
let the body do its thing, no matter what it wanted. 
(She'd kept her body down for years, I said, and now when it moved she 
hurt and complained, even though presumably the motion was what she 
wanted. I confused her, I learned, for she couldn't tell the difference between 
my remarks about the body wanting freedom, and her grim desire to keep it 
doivn. I explained, and she seemed to get it straight. She was in a lot of pain, 
though, and I rang for the Darvoset again, since the staff was late with it. 
(Jane was both surprised and pleased at the unexpected discovery of 
motion. I said we'd try it again tomorrow. In fact, after supper she began to 
hurt even more. I didn't know what to do except a few light touches of massage on the right upper leg. Even I was surprised to feel it move beneath my 
hand — that it could still do so after being held in that position for many 
months, following the fracture of the knee. Her abdomen still feels rock hard, 
though. 
(I stayed over an extra half hour, trying to help her calm down, and 
seemed to eventually make some headway there. She asked me if I felt some 
hope, and I said yes — a strange question coming from someone who'd said 
earlier that they were strongly thinking of dying! 
(I knew my own half-sarcastic remarks about her not letting the body go 
its own healing way obviously were in response to her earlier talk about 
dying. I don't think I overdid tohal I said — though of course any thing like 
that bothers Jane, even when its true. Then most of all, I suppose — for I 
NIRVANA. RIGHT IS MIGHT 
• 349 • 
express my feelings based upon my interpretation of what I see — I ended 
up thinking my remarks were the right way to go, for later she told me that 
I'd expressed some intuitive truths. Who knows — maybe something can be 
salvaged after all. 
(Jane actually smiled as I was getting ready to leave after 7:30. *Maybe 
I'll get to go home after all?" she asked. "That's the idea," I said. I'd mentioned that thought a few days ago.) 
AUGUST 9,1984 
3:58 RM. THURSDAY 
(Jane didn't call last night. I got there afeiv minutes early; she'cl just 
been turned by Patty and was hurting a lot. However, she'd had a good 
night and morning, and had eaten some breakfast. I massaged under her 
left knee when she asked me to, almost at once, and ivas pleased to see the 
motion in her leg, ancl head ancl shoulders, return once again. She said 
she'd reassured herself through the night and morning that it was okay to 
move, that she trusted her body, and had had some movements. 
(She'cl had only a small amount of drainage from the knee. She didn't 
go to hydro this morning: "You've got to be kidding." 
(At lunch time I told her I wanted her to have a session today if at all 
possible, by way of encouraging her new course. After a very light lunch, 
Darvoset, and so forth, I read her yesterday's session and poetry. She was all 
ready to try for a session, but I dicln't push for it yet. I read her the short session for August 7, in which Seth had saicl that her physical improvements 
have already begun. 
("I believe it can be said that they have," I told her. I saicl I hope they 
continue, that I want her home with me. Her left hand bothered her a lot, 
and I massaged it. Her arms and hands kept moving. 
(3:15. Jane felt panicky again, and we talked. She wasn't sure of 
the cause. I thought her fear of motion was involved, as well as old family 
stuff, and she agreed. Half crying, she began more motions with her arms 
and hands. I rubbed her legs a bit and got more responses, but tried not to 
overdo it. 
(Jane said she wanted to try for the session. Her voice was somewhat 
distressed, and with many pauses, but okay all in all. Eyes closed often.) 
Events are as we stated them — 
• 350 • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
(Bea came in to see how we were doing; she said she was in charge 
tonight. I read the line back to Jane.) 
— from the far country has come those proclamations. 
(Long pause.) Ruburt is joyfully understanding the miracle of 
normal physical bodily motion. Again, the session itself does indeed 
physically rearrange, reorganize, so that the bodily and mental contents are filled with soothing healing messages and potions. 
Ruburt will make it home alive, in a much better physical 
situation. 
(Longpause.) I will perhaps briefly return. 
("All right. Thank you." 
(4:00 P.M. Jane said she still felt some panic, and was half crying. 
Lynn slopped by to tell us she'd bring Darvoset at 4:30 — half an hour late 
for some mysterious reason. 
(I read the session to Jane. J called i t excellen t. The key, I said, was the 
reference to her understanding physical motion. I mentioned the joy Seth 
referred to, and Jane said she felt it, even as she cried while I helped her 
move her arms. I gave her eye drops and turned up the TV after she'd gone 
through various additional motions. I told her I wanted her home — that 
all of the rooms in the house were waiting for her. 
(Jane's motions, in the legs especially, were quite startling as I started 
massaging them with Oil of Olay preparatory to turning her on her side. To 
my surprise I discovered that as I massaged those tendons underneath the 
knee, her foot began to move back and forth an inch — something she 
hasn't been able to do for months, at least, and proof that the left knee joint 
wasn't frozen. I congratulated her. It was also easier doing her arms and 
hands and other parts of her body after I turned her. And the turning itself 
went very easily indeed — she didn't cry at all, and seemed to be at some 
sort of peace. I told her she'd done well. 
(In fact, she continued her motions without my asking her loo. Slipper 
didn't work out, though — after taking a half cup of soup she began to 
throw up, and lost it all. This upset me, yet Jane didn't feel bad about it, 
and I curbed my disappointment. 
(I stayed with her until after 7:30. "You'd better get out of here, "Jane 
said, meaning that the longer I stayed, the longer she'd keep up her motions. 
I was only concerned that she not overdo it, and have sore muscles later. I 
told her often how great it was to see her move, and that her motions only 
meant that her body was more than willing to cooperate if allowed to. I do 
NIRVANA. RIGHT IS MIGHT 
• 351 • 
think she has either learned that by now, or is on the way. What counts is 
keeping it up, without trying too hard, and letting the body do its thing. 
("If you keep on improving the way you did today," I said, 
uyour 
progress will be spectacular "She agreed. And why not, I said. It was always 
possible. Miracles gnre nature unimpeded, as Seth has said. Anything will 
help, Jane, so let's see what happens. 
(For now, at least, Fd settle for anything. Jane had said yesterday that 
she'cl even be happy with a 30% improvement. Maybe she's on the way. 
(9:25 P.M.Jane called, with Carla's help, just as I typed these lines. I 
told my wife once again that she'd clone well today.) 
AUGUST 11,1984 
4:09 P.M. SATURDAY 
(Today I took Jane's acrylic painting she calls The Irises into 330. It's 
one of her best. She enjoyed seeing it. A couple of nurses were there when I 
unwrapped it. I told Jane that tomorroiu I'd replace the oil portrait of mine 
that's been there on the bulletin board. In the meantime I shifted around 
other paintings I'd brought to 330 over the weeks, and took some things 
down from the wall. It looks nice. 
(Jane was feeling very restless when I arrived, so I quickly turned her on 
her back. Still, she said she'd had a pretty good night for the most part, and 
a good morning. No hydro. She's kept in mind to remind herself of her trust 
in her body, ancl it's helped. 
(She ate a much better lunch than usual, including a little solid food. 
After lunch I massaged both of her legs as Fve been doing, and once again 
obtained good reactions. Arms and hands and head moved also. 
(Jane asked tha t I read her some Seth ma terial, so I picked the last nine 
sessions — starting with our new resolve and intent on July 30, after the 
long layoff since July 4. They're all short sessions, but now carry all of our 
hopes for the future, and so far have been paying o f f . We also talked of 
plans for the future. 
(When Jane said she ivanted to have a session, her voice ivas quite 
unsteady in trance, and I had to ask her to repeat a number of words.) 
Now, again, Ruburt —Jane — will be able to go home again, in 
far better condition, able (longpause) finally to sit in a wheel-type chair. 
The right leg will become much more mobile, so that the sitting 
is possible. There will be day-by-day — 
• 352 • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
(4:12. Unfortunately, a nurse interrupted us by bringing in Jane's 
dosage of Darvoset. She only stayed a few moments, but it was too long.) 
I may or may not return — but he will sit on his back porch again. 
(uThat's it, "Janefinally said. 
(4:14 P.M. Jane took the Darvoset — which she's getting every two 
hours or so. "Is there that possibility — getting better enough to sit on the 
back porch again?" she asked, half crying. 
("Why not?" I said. 
(She continued to make crying sounds, her face contorted. "Just the possibility of being able to go home and sit on my porch again . . . I want to 
believe it so, with all my heart and soul. . ." 
("Okay," I said, "so let's work for that." 
(I saw no drainage at all from her right knee, and I believe the swelling 
on her left shoulder had decreased considerably. She was quite uncomfortable at times through the afternoon, but all in all I think she was better, 
which means that our approach these days is helping considerably.) 
AUGUST 13,1984 
3:45 P.M. MONDAY 
(Jane didn't call last night. Rita and Patty were having trouble getting 
her comfortable on her back when I got to 330 today. I straightened her out, 
and she did much better. She didn't eat much lunch, though. 
(Jane said she did motions at times during the night and this morning. 
I massaged her legs at 3:15, with good results once again. I see the feet and 
toes responding, and will concentrate more upon them tomorrow. 
(After the massage, which lasted quite a while, she dictated this poem. 
Her feet were still moving. Eyes often closed, voice quiet, many pauses. 
Way up beyond 
the far hidden boulders 
of the world 
where all of nature's 
proclamations rise 
speeds a sweet sivift message 
in which dear secrets 
are unrolled. 
NIRVANA. RIGHT IS MIGHT 
• 353 • 
Seeds of motion, 
sweet, glowing and mysterious 
speak and move 
the sockets with a 
sudden unknown note 
whose meaning is for 
me alone. 
Its source is higher 
its message clear 
though it speaks without words, 
without the vowels 
and syllables. 
(At 4:26, after we'd been talking about various subjects like politics, 
which Jane enjoyed, she told me to turn down the TV. "7 probably won't 
have more than a sentence or two.") 
I merely want to reassure Ruburt of my presence, to let him know 
that I hereby assert again those statements I made concerning his sitting on the porch. 
(Long pause.) Also, again, to tell him that regardless of the 
session's words, new nuances and motions are carried by the session 
itself. 
I bid you a fond, reassuring good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon." 
(4:30 P.M. I'd had to ask Jane to repeat several words, so quiet was her 
dictation. The session Seth had referred to was that for last Saturday, 
August 11, when he'd first mentioned that Jane would be able again to sit 
on her back porch. He's referred to the same thing since then, also. 
(It was time to turn my wife on her left side for half an hour, then take 
my nap. I massaged her legs and arms first, and once again received good 
responses. She did well, and is indeed responding to the new hope we're 
creating.) 
AUGUST 16,1984 
4:37 RM. THURSDAY 
(From 3:47 to 3:57Jane dictated this poem to me. 
• 354 • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
Behind the highest clouds 
man has ever seen 
there are mountains and 
hidden coves from which all 
true proclamations come. 
Their sentences are silent 
yet they contain a word that 
releases and fills secret contracts 
between the gods and man, 
uttered long ago 
uttered without a word or a whisper, 
and speaking for me alone 
with a magic note 
and a secret message 
and a sweet response 
known to me alone. 
(At 4:37 Jane said: "You might want to write this down. But the 
thought came to me that the not-eating might be the body's therapeutic fasting situation — it's own natural version of it. " 
("To what end?" I asked. 
("The healing process." 
(I didn't really understand her answer to my question, but she didn't 
seem up to me pressing the point, so I let it go. She still isn 'I eating enough 
to prevent weight loss. Ergo — if the not-eating persists, it will have 
extremely serious repercussions. She's already gone much too far with it.) 
AUGUST 17,1984 
3:30 RM. FRIDAY 
(Georgia called at about 11:30 this morning. Jane asked me to come 
down to 330 early, so I did. I was working on Chapter 9 —just 
starting 
it — of Dreams. Just as I was opening the garage door, I met a woman 
who had pulled into the driveway, who has a tumor and wanted to see Jane. 
She'd written us several times and I stopped answering after a while. 
(I talked to her for a few minutes, saying 1 had no choice but to leave. I 
heard her car radiator boiling, though it wasn't leaking. She folloivecl me 
NIRVANA. RIGHT IS MIGHT 
• 355 • 
doivn the hill and into the service station there, where I waved goodbye. I said 
I'd probably received her latest letter, but hadn 't answered mail for some time. 
(Jane wasn't nearly as much in poor shape as she'd been the other day 
when I was called down to 330 earlier in the morning. I massaged her left 
leg especially before lunch; it helped. 
(After lunch I took down to billing a check I'd received yesterday from 
our insurance company. The rather small amount, $5,000, was a puzzle. I 
didn't know what it was for. Neither did the people in billing. 
(Strange, I said to Jane when finally I got back to 330. Maybe the whole 
insurance mess will be reopened in more confusion. I should have known 
that the calm of the last few months was deceptive. Our bill has run up 
again to around $55,000 — ancl here insurance hasn't been sending me 
any checks. My idea that the hospital might be billing them quarterly or 
something like that must have been wishful thinking. I'm going to forget the 
whole business if at all possible. 
(Once again Jane ate very little for lunch, although Georgia had said 
she did okay for breakfast. She's still starving, essentially. Jane and Georgia 
talked and smoked while I was down to billing. Jane said she'cl have a session later, then changed her mind as I got ready to do mail. Her voice was 
very shaky, not very distinct, rather high-pitched and with little inflection. 
Eyes open and closed.) 
I bid you a most sympathetic and therapeutic afternoon. 
Ruburt should not be afraid, or ashamed, of the panicky feelings. 
They should also be expressed, and again, they then clear the road 
for new energy. 
The additional motion you have seen arises naturally as the seasons do, and will bring a growing sense of ease. 
Now signs of composure will be noticeable. You have again been 
of most valuable aid. Read the session back to him. We may or may 
not return, but my presence, attention, and energy are with him. 
(All right, "Jane said. 
(3:36 P.M. The "ashamed" bit was new to me. "Thai's probably why I 
had the session, "Jane said. She said she'd felt ashamed of the panic at 
times, and agreed with me that if the shame was used to possibly suppress 
the panic, it — the panic — would last longer. 
(I'll have to admit I was surprised when my wife saicl she felt shame at 
the panic. I hadn't thought there was anything left for her to hide from me — 
• 356 • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
but upon reflection I saw that her behavior was quite typical, quite secretive. 
Maybe I should have figured something like that was going on — but on the 
other hand, hoio can I be responsible, except possibly in a minor way ? 
(It's events like this that make me despair, for once again I see Jane 
going along in the same old way, and wonder what, if any thing, has been 
learned out of all of this. How can one say much has been learned, I ivondered, if my wife is at death's door, and is currently starving herself? Each 
challenge we have to meet and surmount is at a lower level, and simply to 
break i t or surmoun t i t leaves one only back a t the next level from which the 
fall took place. There's never a surge up a few rungs on the ladder, from 
which we can look back in triumph. 
(As I massaged Jane's left leg, she made so much noise — moaning — 
that Georgia came in. I explained the benefits, and showed her what I was 
doing. Georgia understood. After the session I massaged all of Jane's 
limbs — and once again achieved excellent results. Jane had more motions 
in her legs and feet especially. And in spite of those good results, once again 
I wondered: What did you have to do to even get back to the perch from 
which you'd recently fallen?) 
AUGUST 23,1984 
2:46 P.M. THURSDAY 
(These notes are for August 22: 
(We did one thing, surprisingly, that made us both feel very good. Jane 
ivas telling me that an aide who took care of her this morning, and who is 
living apart from her husband and has three kids, looked at a second-hand 
washing machine this noon but couldn't afford the $130 cost. "Tell her 
we'll pay for it," I said, or ivords to that effect. Maybe I said, "We can get it 
for her. "It would save her going to the laundromat to do the wash, though 
it made no provision for the drying part of the chore. Jane at once enthusiastically agreed. As though on signal, the aide came in to empty Jane's 
Foley, and we explained our idea to her. Predictably, she said no at first, but 
we talked her into it. 
("No one's ever done anything like that for me," she said. We explained, 
not in great detail, that others have helped us. It was decided Td give her 
the cash tomorrow, rather than have her or the store send me the bill. She 
couldn't believe it. She kissed each of us. We askecl her not to tell anyone, 
NIRVANA. RIGHT IS MIGHT 
• 357 • 
though I expect shell tell Georgia, her closest friend in the hospital She 
thanked us again before she left work. 
(I haven't seen Jane so enthusiastic about doing anything for a long 
time. She positively bubbled with pleasure, and I knew at once that we'd 
made the right decision. This could have very beneficial therapeutic effects 
on my wife, I realized. Helping another in this fashion was a breakthrough 
for us. Fd often wondered what else I — or anyone else — could do to help 
Jane, and here a possible solution lay right before us all the time . . .) 
u 
(August 23. This morning the ringing telephone got me out of bed 
at 5:45 A.M. It couldn't be anyone except someone at the hospital, I thought 
as I ran out of the bedroom. It was Shawn, the night nurse. I talked to 
Jane: uFm not dying or anything, but could you come doivn now? Fm so 
uncomfortable. . ." 
(I feci the cats and shaved, and arrived at 330 before 7:00 A.M. Jane 
ivas very sore. I got tivo night-shift aides to help me get the chuck out from 
under her, ancl we gradually got her more comfortable. She didn't look so 
hot, with her face all screwed up in pain. Darvoset helped calm her down. I 
saw that the swollen bubble of fluid on her left shoulder blacle was way 
up — this was causing much of her discomfort. She didn 'I know whether to 
stay on her side or go on her back at first, but the shifting of her position 
helped, actually. Mary, the head nurse, came in and I saicl the bubble 
should be drained to relieve the pressure. She agreed: "They'll stick a needle 
in it." She made a note on a chart and left, very pleasant — but no action 
was taken during the clay. No doctor showed up. 
(At breakfast Jane said that later today she wanted to have a short session 
if a t all possible. She seemed to feel better as the day progressed. 1'd taken the 
notebook ivith Chapter 9 of Dreams to the hospital with me. I was working 
on it when she told me to shut the door and get out the notebook for sessions. 
(Jane's voice was halting, almost high-pitched, with a sort of unusual 
sing-song delivery. Her eyes were half closed most of the time.) 
A most fond good afternoon. 
("Good afternoon, Seth.") 
The giving away of the money in order to help with someone 
else's current need was, in it's own way, a stroke of genius, regardless 
of its seeming simplicity and childishness. 
• 358 • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
Because of Ruburt's mixture of symbolic and literal natures, the 
gesture gave him an excellent, definite sense of self-approval in a way 
that he has not experienced in some time. Highly valuable, this is 
responsible for the beginning consumption of solid food. 
Your own behavior was impeccably correct in agreeing, and also 
in your very early morning visit. 
I cannot stress these points too strongly. I also strongly suggest 
that small amounts be thusly given to people whose needs are known 
to you or Ruburt. The results can be turning points toward action 
and motion. I recommend that such activity begin at once. Of 
course, the books have helped people in greater ways, but we want 
quick inoculations, so to speak, of this specific type of self-approval. 
The body is showing even more signs of activity, and this kind of 
behavior mentioned will beautifully reinforce new ease of motion. 
Your own acquiescence to the money recommendations is also 
highly pertinent. 
I may or may not return — but again, the session itself will 
encourage more composure and faith. I may indeed possibly return, 
but I want you two to discuss the session. 
("Thank you.99 
(3:00 P.M. Jane's feet had begun moving in concert as the session progressed. I read the session to her. We didn't get to discuss it much because 
Frank Longwelt visited. I told him the red maple he9d help plant in the back 
yard had evidently died but he said it may not really be dead. 
(I had good results from massaging Jane's limbs and helping them to 
move. This noon she sampled several different foods, to my surprise, some 
things dietary had sen t up on her tray for me, at the request of Georgia. I've 
seen a little improvement in her eating the last few days, but today is the best 
so far.) 
AUGUST 30,1984 
2:50 P.M. THURSDAY 
(Yesterday when I got to 330 at 12:45 Jane lay on her side. She looked 
very poor — gauntfrom eating far too little — like an aged fetus, I thought, 
in her drawn-up position. 
("I may have chosen death," she said weakly. 
NIRVANA. RIGHT IS MIGHT 
• 359 • 
(uYou have, "I said frankly. "It won 9t be long now. I don't see you changing your ways now. It's too late." 
("I don't want to hear about it," she said. "Turn up the TV." Her 
favorite soap opera was on. 
(That little exchange pretty much sums up our attitudes these days, 
and Jane's worsening physical condition. She ate some lunch yesterday, but 
little supper. Today she ate less lunch. I reminded her that I had to go to the 
dentist at 4:15. This at once compressed her ideas of the time in which to do 
anything, although I didn't feel any pressure. She asked me about the time 
quite often. 
(After a meager lunch she said that last night she got a flash, like an 
uearpop," that she wasn't going to die a t this time. It was very brief but very 
clear. I'd known she had something to tell me after lunch, but hadn't expected 
this. I had absolutely no reaction to the news at all — and at once remembered my total lack of reaction when our lawyer had told me that the insurance business was settled. I was evidently so numb pom repeated doses offear 
and concern and negativity and Jane's worsening situation daily, that I 
couldn't react. I didn't believe or disbelieve it. I was afraid to hope, perhaps. 
(Anyhow, Jane seemed to feel a bit better about it, so I went along when 
she even talked about a session this afternoon. I had her help me fill out the 
menu, for I'd decided it was useless for me to continue putting items on it 
that she never touched. 
(Then she said her legs clamored for action exercises, so I massaged her 
left leg particularly. Her legs and feet moved pretty well. 
(Jane could still hurry things up when she wanted to — hence the early 
session because I was leaving later. I must be more negative than I thought 
after all this lime, for I didn't believe her when she said she wasn't going to 
die now. For it certainly does seem that her life is almost over. When she says 
these days that she's going to die, I agree with her. 
(Fler Seth voice wasn't strong at all, and I had trouble understanding 
some of the half-quavering words. Eyes half closed most of the time.) 
We will dismiss preliminaries. 
Ruburt's feeling is true: he is not ready to die yet — he will not 
die yet. There is a difference between feeling a certain way, and knowing the feeling is true — that is, it is true you feel, perhaps, that A is 
B, but you can be completely wrong in your interpretation. Because 
you feel that, say, A and B are one, this does not make them so. 
• 360 • 
THE WAY TOWARD HEALTH 
Of course, many of the difficulties are caused by the environment, and the sooner he can retvirn home the better, regardless of 
how presumptive this may seem. 
He must regain that determination to return, and so should you 
make every effort to do the same; your feelings that the affair is 
hopeless do not mean that the affair is hopeless — and this must be 
as clearly understood as possible. 
Moving the imagination in that direction is highly important. It 
is indeed possible for you two to do this — that vital move of creative, imaginative motion. 
Again, the session alone will indeed help, and restore some 
tranquillity. 
Take a moment. I will hopefully then return. 
(2:59. "Oh Gocl,"Jane said, using an expression that's become one of 
her favorites. "Give me a puff As soon as I said I'd do it — the session — 
I got scared. It shows how you 've got to get those feelings out. I ivish I could 
yell and scream, but I can't. . . " I read her the session. "Oh, my arms," she 
said. I'd felt them, and she ivas holding them as rigid as ben t metal rods. 
(3:06. "Iguess I will do a little more. It's very hard, oh God . . . ") 
Again, it is vital that Ruburt express those feelings of panic, 
thereby releasing them outward. That release also relieves the muscles 
and rearranges structures, like putting crystal together in a new form. 
The session itself will again help relieve .. .* 
(3:08. "Oh, Bob, that's all," she said, half crying. "I wish I could 
scream out. "I'd told her to do just that more than once. 
(We talked a little. Jane seemed more concerned about when I'd leave for 
the dentist than any thing else. So restricted has her world become. 
(When she finally asked me what I thought of the session, I had trouble 
expressing any hope, versus those negative feelings I've been aware of for so 
long now. I did say things like, "This morning while working on Chapter 9 
for Dreams I had to reread some sessions from back in 1981 — and they 're 
perfect. They go into exact detail as to what was wrong, and they fit today 
like a glove. Only look where we are now — a lot worse off." What had happened to the four years? 
(I did finally express some anger as the time approached for me to leave. 
I accusedJane of not caring about the emotional storms I was going through. 
This came about when I tried to make her arms comfortable, and found her 
NIRVANA. RIGHT IS MIGHT 
• 361 • 
holding herself as rigid as could be — after all she's supposed to know and 
have learned. It got to me. I felt blown atvay by such behavior. 
("But I do care,"Jane protested. "I care a lot. I've even thought of dying 
to let you go free." 
("Believe me," I said, "I've had the thought. I'd be lying if I saicl I 
hadn't. . ." 
(I should add that I didn't mean I wished she'd die so that I'd be free. 
I want her to live — with me, at home, working and singing. I thought of 
this in the dentist's chair. Iforgot to tell her when I got back at supper time, 
but will tomorrow. Jane called just as I was typing this session.) 
*[Note on Sept. 9, 1984, four days after Jane's death — Seth's last 
words, trying to help to the last.] 
EPILOGUE 
S
o there you have it: the last book. The end of the Seth material — 
or is it? Now that my emotions have calmed down somewhat after 
proofreading The Way Toward Health, I can deal with that question at 
least a litde bit. 
During her last days in the hospital Jane simply stopped eating, 
and I knew that her transition to another reality was near. I was 
with her when she died in her sleep at that early-morning hour in 
September 1984. As always, Seth had done his part, and more, as the 
record in The Way Toward Health shows. Yet he too acquiesced to 
Jane's death when she made her decision to go. There were no 
protests on his part, no recriminations about his voice "being stilled 
forever," for example. Nor did I feel any sort of rebellion — only a 
state of numb acceptance. 
Although I told myself that I knew Jane still lived, I wasn't used to 
being in the presence of physical death. I made two ball-point pen 
drawings of my wife while she lay on her side with her beautiful eyes 
still open; they were blue flecked with hazel, and were as clear and 
peaceful as those of a child. I had the vague idea that I'd use the 
drawings as references for portraits that I would paint of her. They 
would be unique, I thought. (I have yet to paint those particular 
images, but still plan to do so.) 
. 3RO . 
EPILOGUE 
• 3 6 3 Jane had been a devoted Catholic in her youth. Since she had 
died in a Catholic hospital, I called for a priest to speak at her bedside. I tried, but could not cry as he spoke: "Loving and merciful 
God, we entrust our sister to you. You loved her greatly in this 
life ... M The priest promised to send me a copy of his eulogy. 
In the days that followed I attended to the cremation Jane had 
decided upon long ago, took care of legal matters, paid bills, spoke 
briefly with a few friends. Our gravesite is not in Elmira. Later, when 
I could be alone, my tears began to come. I cried each day for more 
than a year. Yet the day after my wife's death I'd gone back to work, 
finishing Volume 2 of Dreams, "Evolution," and Value Fulfillment. 
What else was I to do? 
And as Jane survives, so does her work. Although one can say that 
her life is over in this reality, her lifework isn't. Many have written 
that her books are new each time they read them — that they're 
constantly finding new material in them. This happens with me, too. 
It also happens with the audio tapes from Jane's ESP class, as she 
speaks for Seth, or as herself in exchanges with students, or as she 
speaks and sings in her trance language, Sumari. What wonderful 
signs of survival all of these things are! 
Yet there can be even more to come out of the great bulk of 
Jane's work. The 15 three-ring binders containing her poems, all 
neady typed, for example; her essays and journals; other blocks of 
unpublished Seth material, one of which I mentioned in the Introduction; an unfinished autobiography that perhaps I could put into 
publishable shape; likewise, passages from an unfinished fourth 
Oversoul Seven novel, in which Jane dealt with Seven's childhood; a 
book of her paintings, with commentary; several early novels that I 
still believe merit publishing. Enough there to do for the rest of my 
life, certainly, and perhaps for others to carry on after I join my wife. 
Over the years Jane's and my work led to our receiving many 
thousands of letters, not only from this country but from abroad, 
too. I still gratefully receive letters almost every day, and still struggle 
to answer each one in some fashion. Without the responses of 
others, Jane and I often said, where would we be? Except for a few 
missives that may have escaped us in the very beginning, I've saved 
them all. 
• 3 6 4 EPILOGUE 
When Jane published The Seth Material in 1970, we were quite 
unprepared for the impact her work would have. Boxes and boxes of 
letters are now at Yale University Library, where their privacy is protected. I have many more to send now. I love every letter we've ever 
received, even the ones that are not so nice. In my opinion, friendships with those we've never met physically are rare things to know 
and experience. Often those friends gave of themselves in ways we 
couldn't equal. They sdll do. 
Also, copies of all of the Seth sessions — regular, private, and for 
ESP class — are in the collection of our papers at Yale. Much other 
material is there also: I've spent several years assembling it. Practically 
all of this is open to the public, free of charge, with but a few restrictions as to how mvich can be copied for personal use. Sometimes my 
permission is required. 
I'm proud to have helped Jane and Seth make their contributions in our complex and very creative system of things in this reality. 
I thank them —just as I thank each and every one of you, dear readers, for your past, present, and future contributions. Each one of us 
is part of the great mystery of All That Is, then, which we explore 
together, yet each in our own way. 
As Seth said in the session for July 31, 1984, in The Way Toward 
Health, "The sessions, like life itself, have been and are a gift, rising 
from the immense, never-ending creativity of existence." 
I like ending this epilogue on such a note. 
Robert E Butts 
Elmira, New York 
September 1997 
INDEX 
Abilities 
discovery of one's own, 176 
distorted ideas about, 92-93 
innate, 79,80 
importance of using to fullest, 94 
Abortion, spontaneous, 285 
Abstinence, 257 
Adolescents, reincarnational lives and, 293 
AdvenHires in Consciousness (Roberts), 78n 
Aging, negative beliefs about, 259-60 
positive aspects of, 260 
AIDS, 194, 280-81 
Alcohol abuse, 233 
All That Is, 46, 201,325 
Alternative medicine, 281-82 
Amnesia, 296, 305 
Anger, 69,203,238 
Animals 
behavior of, 162, 285 
experimentation on, 197 
innate abilities of, 80 
innate knowledge of, 34 
treatment of, 197 
Antibiotics, 107 
Approval 
need for, 191 
of self, 96-97 
Arthritis, 68,236 
Attitudes 
biologically valid, 65 
innate, 68-69,70,74 
Attributes, innate, 80 
Authority, beliefs about, 254 
Average, striving to be, 93 
Avoidance techniques, 8 
Balancing procedures, of the body, 194 
Behavior 
extremes of, 26,120,121,130 
habitual, changing, 250 
Beliefs 
as tools, 241 
biologically valid, 65 
Beliefs (continued) 
changing, 249-50,261-62,284 
conflicting, 92-95,120, 200, 242,294 
disease and, 71 
erroneous, body consciousness and, 120 
innate, 248 
negative, 164 
sexually-oriented, 241 
"sudden conversion" of, 311 
Bible, the, Seth on, 62 
Birds, innate abilities of, 79, 80 
Birth process, false beliefs about, 69 
Birth, attitudes possessed at, 67 
Blue feelings, therapeutic expression of, 29, 
165 
Body and mind, as interwoven, 131 
Body consciousness, 15-16,120,144,160 
abilities of, 37 
disease and, 143 
healing functions of, 114 
physical body and, 12,14,15 
Body processes, misreadings of, 129-130 
Body, the 
as combination of spontaneity and order, 
136-137 
as natural self-healer, 104,107,109 
balancing prodedures of, 194 
beliefs about, 216-17,258-59 
defenses of, 125 
distorted ideas about, 155-156 
distrust of, 7,155-156,163 
ideal, idea of, 162 
natural processes of, medical attitudes 
about, 111 
See also body consciousness 
Butterflies, innate abilities of, 79, 80 
Butts, Robert 
dreams of, 13,1747,53,54-55,56,58, 62, 
64, 78, 79, 83, 84-85, 89-90, 97,119, 
120,122,123,126,141,143,147,156157,166 
on Jane's condition, 177-178,179 
on Jane's fears, 198-199 
• 3 6 5 • 3 6 6 INDEX 
Butts, Robert (continued) 
relationship with Jane of, 198 
Seth on dreams of, 90, 88,119,123,140, 
146,157 
Cancer, 67, 70,194 
consciousness in, 72 
martyrdom and, 273 
role of imagination in fighting, 274 
Cardwell, Maude (editor of Reality Change), 
17t* 
Catholic Church, conflicts with creativity of, 
200 
Cells, consciousness of, 288 
Cellular communication, 140 
Challenges, positive aspects of undertaking, 
266-67 
Children 
illness and, 193, 214 
play and, 172,227, 228-29 
early instance of death or disease of, 283284, 285 
innate beliefs of, 248-49 
responses to illness of, 214-15 
spontaneity and, 251 
Choice, of positive concepts, 20, see also free 
will; will 
Circulatory system, 104 
Cognition, direct, 167 
Common cold, 125 
Communication, 210, 258 
cellular, 140 
clearing channels of, 276 
therapeutic benefits of, 207 
with inner self, 146 
with plants, 209, 210 
Compassion 
expression of, 173 
misplaced, 273 
Competition in nature, 52 
Compulsive behavior, 251-52 
Conscious mind, 144-145 
Consciousness, 287 
death and, 74-75, 325 
healing functions of, 114 
in cancer, 72 
in radiation, 67, 70 
mobility of, 39-40 
of inanimate objects, 98 
official line of, 114,116-117, 242 
relationship with body, 144 
rhythms of, 43 
See also body consciousness 
Constipation, 257 
Control 
desire to, 251 
increasing sense of, 291-92 
Cooperation in nature, 52 
Creative approach to health, 123 
Creativity, 122-123 
and body consciousness, 15 
distorted beliefs about, 239, 249 
expression of, 201 
Cross purposes, living at, 235-43 
Damnation, 267 
Daredevils, and health, 139-151 
Death, 74-75 
as a continuation, 194 
as healthy for planet, 140 
choosing, 194,316-17 
consciousness and, 325 
positive view of, 140 
Death-defiers, and health, 139-151 
Deduction, instantaneous, 23 
Defects, physical, 162 
Defenses mechanisms, 15,125 
Depression, 265, 266 
alleviating, 300 
mind-regulating drugs and, 267-68 
of physical body, 29 
Desire, for health, 77 
Discipline, 253, 254 
Disease 
as necessary, 242 
of childhood, 193 
as a kind of health, 188 
as exaggeration of normal processes, 71 
as experience, 143 
as fulfilling purposes, 72 
as health promoting, 193, 206 
as part of a process, 131-132 
as sustainer of all life, 188 
fear of, 188 
spontaneity and, 258 
Disinclination for life, 285 
Doubt, 69,127 
Dream suggestion, as method to get to root 
of fear, 179 
Dreams, "Evolution", and Value Fulfillment 
(Roberts), 9, 50, 56, 60-61, 88,167,192 
Dreams, 57, 60,62,179, 227-28 
redemptive, 58-59 
sensual, 39-40,41 
telepathic, 140,141,143 
Dreams, of Robert Butts, 13,47,53,54-55, 
56, 58, 62, 64, 78, 79, 83, 84-85, 89-90, 
97,119,120,122,126,141,143,147 
INDEX 
• 367 • 
Dreams, of Robert Butts (continued), 156157,166 
Seth on, 83, 86, 88, 90,119,123,140, 
146,157 
Dreams, of Jane Roberts, 28, 39-40, 82,101, 
171,226 
Seth on, 40-41,43, 82,173 
Drugs, 233,273, 293 
suicide and, 268 
mind-regulating, 267-68 
Dying, loneliness of the, 273 
Early man, 56, 57, 63 
beliefs about, 50 
dream state of, 57, 62 
Seth on, 51-52 
Ego, 145-146 
Elderly, reincarnational lives and the, 293 
Electrons, subjective lives of, 33-34 
Emotion, expression of, 203-204 
Emotional eruptions, 254 
"End justifies means", concept of, 305-06, 
315 
Energy 
as constantly being created, 149,150 
as love, 149 
fear of, 10-11 
universal, 149-51 
Environment, and health, 152-52 
Epilepsy, 10,238-39 
Equality, misrepresentations of, 92-93 
Exercise, physical, 155-56,157 
Existence, varieties of, 146 
Existences, new, 325 
Expectation, 249 
innate, 74 
Expression of feelings, as therapeutic, 34142, 355,360 
Extremes, of behavior, 26,121,130 
Exuberance, 19 
as innate, 48, 69 
body consciousness and, 15 
in nature, 158 
Faith, 36 
Family relationships, and health, 152-53, 
278 
Fanaticism, 311 
Fate, testing, 142 
Fear 
of expressing inner self. 254 
as not innate, 69 
dream suggestion and, 179 
of being wrong, 190 
Fear (continued) 
of personal energy, 10-11 
of personal power, 9 
of trusting the body, 95 
role of, in physical exercise, 156 
Fearful response, cycle of, 120,126 
Feelings 
affects of, on body, 164 
disease and, 71 
expressing difficult, 218 
expression of, as therapeutic, 355 
Female-segregated communities, 258 
Fetus, natural desires of the, 284-85 
Food, attitudes about, 315-16 
Framework 1 (physical reality), 15971, 275 
Framework 2 (inner reality), 159w, 161,165, 
275, 276,279 
Free association, 204,184,187, 200 
Freewill, 175,290-91 
Frustration, releasing, 203 
Future lives, memory of, 289 
Future, the 
expectation of, 249 
planning for, 178 
worrying about, 81 
Games, benefits of, 277 
Generosity, therapeutic effects of, 357-58 
Genetic messages, as affected by thoughts, 
170 
Genetic planning, 162 
Genetic variances, value of, 287 
Genetics, 170 
Genius, distorted ideas about, 92 
Goals, as possible, 178 
God, 224, 306 
as vengeful, 314 
illness as punishment by, 163 
Group therapy, 278 
Guilt, 163 
Habitual thought processes, breaking down, 
270 
Hallucination, 301,303, 304 
Healing 
at different levels of consciousness 40-41 
methods of, 164 
signs of, 45, 56,102 
stimulating, 269 
Health 
body consciousness and, 15 
environment and, 152-53 
of body, as related to state of world, 13132 
• 368 • 
INDEX 
Health (continued) 
family relationships and, 152-53 
as simplicity itself, 81,113 
attitudes detrimental to, 148 
attitudes promoting, 148 
creative approach to, 123 
daredevils, death-defiers, and, 139-51 
distorted ideas about, 145 
ideas about, 158, 213-14 
innate predisposition toward, 65-66 
of heart, 312 
reclaiming, 20 
reinforcing ideas of, 223 
spontaneity and, 250 
stages of, 140 
symptoms of, 164 
Health, the way toward, as natural mental 
behavior, 81 
Homosexuality, fear of, 281 
Hospital environment, 12, 95-96, 119 
as detrimental to health, 10, 64 
negative attitudes in, 31,53, 55 
Hospital, as protector, 190 
Humility, false, 93 
Humor, 277, 292 
Hypnosis, 297, see also self-hypnosis 
Hysterectomy, 255 
Ideas 
affect on health of, 158 
ancient, 85-86 
Illness 
as desired expression, 231 
as punishment, 163, 224, 230 
as way of attaining desired result, 215-16 
choosing, 156,161, 215, 231-32 
distorted ideas about, 145 
reincarnation and, 230 
Imaginary beings, constructing, 301, 306 
Imagination, therapeutic use of, 16, 30, 38, 
97, 223, 224, 229 
Immune system, 143,145,192,194, 280 
Impatience, value of, 49, 75, 76-77 
Infants 
as predisposed to health, 65 
innate attitudes of, 67, 68-69 
malformed, 74 
stillborn, 74 
Inner consciousness, death and, 74-75 
Inner ego, 145-46 
universal love and, 148 
Inner reality, see Framework 2 
Inner self, 145 
awareness of, 289-90 
fear of expressing. 254 
Inner self (continued) 
spiritual and physical dexterity of, 160 
Inoculations, childhood, 193,195, 196 
Intellect 
as contrasted with natural mental 
behavior, 81 
spontaneity and, 137 
Intent, power of, 16 
Intentions, good, 99 
Joseph, as Seth's name for Robert Butts, viii 
Joy, 19 
reclaiming, 20 
Knowledge 
as dangerous, 307 
different kinds of, 137 
fear of, 240 
female sex and, 241 
Latest-present, 33-35 
Letting go, 268-69 
Life after death, 249, 272 
Life energy, 7, 9, 282 
Life purpose, physical reality and, 273 
Life, relationship to death and disease, 188 
"Light of the universe," 60-61 
Live, learning to, 269 
Lives, multiple, 284 
See also secondary personalities 
Living in the moment, 81-82, 84,11819,183, 300 
as "The New Way," 85-86 
Loneliness of the dying, 273 
Love, healing properties of, 154 
Magic, as life unimpeded, 136 
Male-segregated communities, 257 
Marriage, male beliefs about, 255-56 
Massage, Seth on, 4 
Meaning, found in dire circumstances, 28386 
Medical profession 
attitudes of, 111 
beliefs about, 158 
fear of homosexuality in, 281 
Medical science 
and animals, 197 
view of body as mechanical model, 153-54 
Medical technology, faith in, 158 
Medicine, western, 196-97 
Mental deficiencies, as a different 
perception of reality, 286 
Mental exercises, 50, 275-76 
Mental well-being, impediments to, 20 
INDEX 
• 369 • 
Mentally deficient people, abilities of, 28788 
"Might is right," concept of, 312 
Mind and body as interwoven, 131 
Mistakes, identifying with, 148 
Mobility, physical, 203 
conflicting feelings about, 236, 238 
fear of, 68 
mental motion and, 94 
success and, 236 
Multiple personalities, 295-298 
See also secondary personalities 
Natural processes of the body 
medical attitudes about, 109, 111 
Nature 
esthetics of, 174-75 
impulse toward exuberance in, 158 
impulse toward well-being in, 158 
Negative beliefs, 164 
of society, 172 
short circuiting, 12 
Negative suggestion, 121 
as cause of illness in children, 216 
in hospital environment, 64 
"New Way, The", 85 
Nirvana, concept of, 312 
Norm, dealing with the, 92-93 
Obsessive behaviors, 315 
Optimism, 79 
as essential to nature's purpose, 82 
children and, 248-49 
innate, 74 
innate, in other species, 79, 81 
Oral traditions, 62 
Order, 136,137 
Pain 
as goal, 312 
relationship to pleasure, 139,150 
Paranoia, 6-7, 302, 304 
Parenthood, psychic, 83 
Parents, hints for, 215, 216, 217, 223 
Past lives, 284-85 
memory of, 289 
modifying beliefs of, 284 
Past 
changing from the present, 24, 25, 30-31, 
32-34, 38, 86 
dwelling on the, 81 
learning from the, 191 
Peace of mind, steps to attaining, 183-84 
Pendulum method, of obtaining 
knowledge, 205n 
Perfection, physical, idea of, 162 
Perfectionism and epilepsy, 238 
Personality, conflicting aspects of, 294-95 
Pessimism, development of, 248-49 
Pets, as beneficial to health, 154, 279 
Philosophy, and life, 310 
Physical changes, as affected by thoughts, 
170 
Physical exercise, 155-56,157 
Physical life 
as impossible without death and disease, 
188 
as one condition of being, 146 
spiritual life and, 150-151 
Physical mobility, as associated with 
punishment, 340 
See also mobility, physical 
Physical well-being, impediments to, 20 
Plants, as reacting to human emotion, 209 
Play, importance of, 172-73, 222-24 
Pleasure, 36 
as a virtue, 200 
relationship to pain, 139,150 
subversion of, 312-13 
Poetry, Jane's, 51, 60,132-35,137-38, 202, 
221, 319-24, 332, 346-47, 352-53, 354 
Positive attitudes, as present at birth, 67, 6869 
as preventative medicine, 274 
as release from depression, 266 
Positive suggestion, and health, 171 
Power, in the present, 243 
Predisposition, innate, toward health, 65-66 
Pregnancy, fear of, 221 
Present, power in the, 243 
Preventative medicine, drawbacks of, 281 
Pride, 93 
Probabilities, 175 
Probable events, 229 
Probable reality, 122 
Problems, as caused by own beliefs, 232-33 
Psychic abilities, Jane's guilt about 
expressing her, 94 
Punishment, 227 
as associated with physical motion, 340 
Quality of life, 20 
Quest for Fire (movie), depiction of early 
man in, 50, 51-52 
Realities, different, 273 
Reality Change (newsletter), 17n, 70, 76,101, 
159, 230 
Reality, 136 
conflicting beliefs about nature of, 301 
• 370 • 
INDEX 
Reality (continued) 
different perceptions of, 286 
probable, 122 
Reasoning mind, 137 
Reasoning, 144 
Reconciliation, 201 
Reincarnation, 228, 230, 231 
Reincarnational existences, 229, 293 
Reincarnational experiences, 289, 292 
Reincarnational influences, 120,121,16061 
Reinforcing a sense of health, 158 
Relaxation, 127 
Religion 
spontaneity and, 253-54 
the nature of reality and, 307 
Religious beliefs, 163, 253-54, 310 
about consciousness, 254 
about suffering, 291 
play and, 224 
changing, 311 
suicide and, 272 
Religious conflicts, 200 
Respect, 206 
Responsibility, personal, abandoning 301-02 
Righteousness, distorted versions of, 99 
Rightness, sense of, 331 
Roberts, Jane 
dreams of, 13-14, 28, 32, 39-40, 64-65, 66, 
335 
guilt and, 94 
distrust of body and, 203 
early insecurities of, 191 
family relationships of, 58-60,198-99, 20708, 212, 220, 227 
female role and, 203 
last days of, Butts on, 370 
on her own dying, 317-18, 325, 326-27, 
358-59, 347, 361 
on speaking for Seth, 221 
poetry of, 221-22 
see also poetry, Jane's 
relationship with Butts, 198-99 
relationship with in-laws, 191-92 
religion and, 202, 207, 221-22 
sexual concerns of, 221 
state of when Seth is "present", 114-15, 
328-29 
Role, conventional, of male, 93 
Ruburt, as Seth's name for Jane, 4 
Safety 
concern for, 6 
sense of, 19 
Sasquatch, 22-24, 25 
Schizophrenia, 295-298, 306, 307-08 
Science, ideas of, 252-53 
Secondary personalities, 9,10-11, 304-05 
Segregated societies, 258 
Self expression, 236, 239 
Self 
as blessed, 12 
destructive ways of, 317 
Self-approval, 96-97, 98-99 
Self-condemnation, illness and, 161 
Self-deceptive feelings, as conscious 
decisions, 7-8 
Self-hypnosis, 200 
Self-image, as it affects health, 30 
Self-respect, 99 
Sessions, therapeutic value of, 350, 360 
Seth Material\ The, 94 n 
Seth material 
as ignored by society, 18 
Ph.D. thesis on, 25-26 
Seth 
on Jane's innocence, 334 
on dreams. See Butts, Robert, dreams of; 
Roberts, dreams of 
on Jane's health, 29-30, 47-48, 331 
on Jane's exercise of will, 8 
on Jane's misplaced guilt, 333, 339 
on Jane's readiness to die, 359 
on Jane's relationship with her mother, 
212, 333, 334, 337, 339 
on negative dreams, 16 
on abilities of unrecognized species, 2324 
on Jane's abilities, 201 
on sessions as therapeutic, 4,114-15, 32829 
on symbolism in dreams, 57 
Seth Speaks (Roberts), 63 
Sexual attitudes, 255 
Sexual roles, beliefs about, 236-37 
Sexuality, 256-57 
Shame, 217 
Sinful self, 9,13, 254, 257 
religious concepts of, 12 
Skin eruptions, 254 
Soul, 145 
Speakers, the, 62-63 
Spiritual life, physical life and, 150-51 
Spirituality, as opposed to sexuality, 256 
Spontaneity, 252-53 
body consciousness and, 16 
religion and, 253-54 
children and, 251 
discipline and, 253 
distrust of, 10 
fear of, 251 
health and, 250 
INDEX 
• 371 • 
Spontaneity (continued) 
intellect and, 137 
sexuality and, 255 
Starting over, 243, 261-62, 280 
Stuttering, 238 
Subconscious, 144 
Success, dilemmas regarding, 236 
Suffering 
attitudes about, 312-13 
disease and, 188-89 
religious ideas about, 291 
Suggestion 
health and, 168-84 
negative, 121,122 
positive, 171 
power of, 38 
Suicide, 260, 262-68, 270,272, 311 
drug use and, 268 
young people and, 259, 262-63 
Sumari, 78n, 190,192 
Survival of the fittest, as detrimental 
concept, 162,164 
Survival 
as beyond this existence, 325 
drive for, 160 
innate predisposition toward, 65 
Symbiotic relationships, 193,194,195 
Symbolism, in dreams, 41, 42, 43-44, 48 
Symptoms, reincarnational connections of, 
121 
Talent, distorted ideas about, 92-93 
Temperature, as sign of healing, 102,104 
The Individual and the Nature of Mass Events 
(Roberts), 159w 
The Nature of Personal Reality (Roberts), 20572 
Therapeutic effects of generosity, 357-58 
Therapy, 278 
Thinking 
automatic, 144 
styles of, 116-117 
Thoughts, biologically valid, 65 
Time 
changing concepts of, see past, changing 
the nature of, 249 
simultaneous, 284 
Touch, releasing stress through, 57-58 
Transmigration, 88 
Trust, 48 
Trusting the body, 82, 83 
Ulcers, 254 
Unconscious mind, 144 
Universal love, 148 
Universe 
as meaningful, 283 
Universe (continued) 
consciousness of the, 149 
people as conscious parts of the, 147-48 
Vaccination, See inoculation 
Value fulfillment, 175, 206 
Viruses, 71, 206 
Vitality 
body consciousness and, 15 
as innate attitude, 69 
Voices, hearing hallucinated, 301, 303, 304 
Warmth, as a sign of healing, 45, 56 
Way Toward Health, Thet title and genesis of, 
5 
Well-being, 97,148 
as innate attitude, 69 
in nature, 158 
Western medicine, 196-97 
Will to live 
as innate,7, 269 
how it is compromised, 6-7 
subversion of, 272 
weakened, and AIDS, 280 
Will, 8-9 
Wish fulfillment, 43 
World, state of, as related to health of body, 
131-32 
Worry, 81 
Worst-case scenarios, as destructive to wellbeing, 20, 314 
NEW SETH BOOKS, 
THE ART OF ROBERT F. BUTTS, 
AND THE SETH AUDIO COLLECTION 
NEW SETH BOOKS - "THE EARLY SESSIONS" - BY JANE ROBERTS 
VOLUMES 1 T H R O U G H 9 ARE N O W AVAILABLE 
The Early Sessions is the material given by Seth in the first 6 years of his relationship with Jane Roberts and her husband Robert Butts. It consists of the first 
510 sessions dictated by Seth and is published in 9 volumes. The majority of 
The Early Sessions material has never been published in any form. It contains 
great new material and insights from Seth on a vast array of topics. 
NEW SETH BOOKS - "THE PERSONAL SESSIONS" - BY JANE ROBERTS 
Order by phone or at our website. 
THE ART OF ROBERT F. BUTTS - Limited Edition Prints signed by the cocreator of the Seth books. Order by phone or at our website. 
RARE RECORDINGS OF SETH SPEAKING through Jane Roberts are now 
available on audio cassette and CD. The Seth Audio Collection consists of Seth 
sessions recorded by Jane's student, Rick Stack, duringjane's classes in Elmira, 
New York in the 1970s. Volume I of The Seth Audio Collection consists of six 
(1-hour) tapes or CDs plus a 34-page booklet of Seth transcripts. The majority of selections in Volume I have never been published in any form and represent the best of Seth's comments gleaned from over 120 Seth Class sessions. 
Additional individual Seth Session tapes/CDs are also available. 
FOR A FREE CATALOG please send your request to the address below. 
ORDER INFORMATION: 
To order The Seth Audio Collection Volume I ($59.95 for tapes, $69.95 for 
CDs), or any of the 9 volumes of The Early Sessions ($22.95 each), please visit 
our website at www.sethcenter.com or call (516) 869-9108, or send your name 
and address, with a check or money order payable to New Awareness Network, 
Inc. Please include shipping charges (see below). NY residents add appropriate 
sales tax. Allow 2-3 weeks for delivery. 
Shipping charges: US - $6.00 first item/$1.50 each additional item 
Canada - $7.00 first item/$4.00 each additional item 
Foreign orders - Call or visit our website 
Mail to: 
NEW AWARENESS NETWORK, INC. 
P.O. Box 192 
Manhasset, New York 11030 
(516) 869-9108 between 9:00 A.M. - 5:00 P.M. EST 
Or visit online: www.sethcenter.com 
ALSO FROM AMBER-ALLEN PUBLISHING 
Seth Speaks by Jane Roberts. In this essential guide to conscious 
living, Seth clearly and powerfully articulates the concept that we 
'create our own reality according to our beliefs. 
The Nature of Personal Reality by Jane Roberts. Seth explains how the 
conscious mind directs unconscious activity, and has at its command 
all the powers of the inner self. 
The Nature of the Psyche by Jane Roberts. Seth reveals a startling new 
concept of self, answering questions about many aspects of the 
psyche, including love, dreams, sexuality, and death. 
The Individual and the Nature of Mass Events by Jane Roberts. Extending the idea that we create our own reality, Seth explores the 
connection between personal beliefs and world events. 
The Magical Approach by Jane Roberts. Seth discusses how we can live 
our lives spontaneously, creatively, and according to our own natural 
rhythms. 
The "Unknown" Reality, Volumes One and Two by Jane Roberts. Exploring 
the interdependence of multiple selves, Seth explains how understanding unknown dimensions can change the world as we know it. 
Dreams, "Evolution, "and Value Fulfillment, Volumes One and Two by Jane 
Roberts. These books answer crucial questions about the entire 
significance of Seth's system of thought, as he takes us on an odyssey 
to identify the origins of our universe and our species. 
The Oversoul SevenTrilogy by Jane Roberts. The adventures of Oversoul Seven are an intriguing fantasy, a mind-altering exploration of 
our being, and a vibrant celebration of life. 
Healing Myths, Healing Magic by Donald M. Epstein. Dr. Epstein examines the deeply ingrained stories, or myths, that are commonly held 
about how our bodies heal — myths that may actually inhibit healing. 
ALSO FROM AMBER-ALLEN PUBLISHING 
The Four Agreements by don Miguel Ruiz. Based on ancient Toltec 
wisdom, The Four Agreements offer a powerful code of conduct that 
can rapidly transform our lives to a new experience of freedom, true 
happiness, and love. (Also available in Spanish and on audio CD) 
The Four Agreements Companion Book by don Miguel Ruiz with Janet 
Mills. This companion book offers additional insights, practice ideas, 
questions and answers about applying The Four Agreements, and 
shares true stories from people who have already changed their lives. 
(Also available in Spanish) 
The Mastery of Love by don Miguel Ruiz. Using insightful stories to 
bring his message to life, don Miguel Ruiz shows us how to heal our 
emotional wounds, recover the freedom and joy that are our 
birthright, and restore the spirit of playfulness that is vital to loving 
relationships. (Also available in Spanish and on audio CD) 
Prayers: A Communion With Our Creator by don Miguel Ruiz with Janet 
Mills. This beautiful collection of prayers (including the popular 
Circle of Fire Prayer), guided meditations, and powerful prose, will 
inspire and transform your life. (Also available in Spanish) 
The Voice of Knowledge by don Miguel Ruiz with Janet Mills. In this 
life-altering book, don Miguel Ruiz reminds us of a profound and 
simple truth: the only way to end our emotional suffering and 
restore our joy in living is to stop believing in lies — mainly about 
ourselves. (Also available in Spanish and on audio CD) 
The Seven Spiritual Laws of Success by Deepak Chopra. In this classic 
bestseller, Chopra distills the essence of his teachings into seven 
simple principles that can easily create success in all areas of our lives. 
For a free catalog of our titles, write: 
Amber-Allen Publishing, P.O. Box 6657, San Rafael, CA 94903 
or call toll-free (800)624-8855 
Please visit our website at www.amberallen.com 
